 

The International Cricket Council 

  

Code of Conduct for Players and Player 

Support Personnel 

 

  
 
 
 

Effective as from 28 September 2017 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

For information regarding the Code of Conduct, please contact: 
 
The ICC’s Cricket Operations Department  
International Cricket Council 
PO Box 500 070 
Dubai, United Arab Emirates 
 
Tel (switchboard):  
Facsimile:  
 
  
 

+971 4 382 8800 
+971 4 382 8600  

 

 
 
1 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 

ARTICLE 1 

SCOPE AND APPLICATION ................................................................................. 3 

ARTICLE 2 

CODE OF CONDUCT OFFENCES ....................................................................... 4 

ARTICLE 3 

REPORTING AN ALLEGED OFFENCE UNDER THE CODE OF CONDUCT ... 10 

ARTICLE 4 

NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE ............................................................................ 11 

ARTICLE 5 

THE DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE .................................................................... 13 

ARTICLE 6 

STANDARD OF PROOF AND EVIDENCE ......................................................... 19 

ARTICLE 7 

SANCTIONS ON PLAYERS AND PLAYER SUPPORT PERSONNEL .............. 21 

ARTICLE 8 

APPEALS ............................................................................................................. 27 

ARTICLE 9 

RECOGNITION OF DECISIONS ......................................................................... 29 

AMENDMENT AND INTERPRETATION OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT .......... 26 

DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................................... 27 

MINIMUM OVER RATE REQUIREMENTS, CALCULATION, REPORTING AND 
DISCIPLINARY PROCESS AND SANCTIONS ................................................... 30 

MATCH FEES ...................................................................................................... 33 

EXPEDITED PROCEDURE FOR CODE OF CONDUCT OFFENCES 
OCCURRING DURING AN ICC EVENT ............................................................. 34 

ARTICLE 10 

APPENDIX 1 

APPENDIX 2 

APPENDIX 3 

APPENDIX 4 

 
 
 

2 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

INTERNATIONAL CRICKET COUNCIL  

CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PLAYERS 

 AND PLAYER SUPPORT PERSONNEL  

The  ICC  is  the  international  federation  responsible for  the  global  governance  of  the  sport  of  cricket and 
the Code of Conduct for Players and Player Support Personnel (the “Code of Conduct”) is adopted and 
implemented as part of the ICC’s continuing efforts to maintain the public image, popularity and integrity 
of  cricket  by  providing:  (a)  an  effective  means  to  deter  any  participant  from  conducting  themselves 
improperly  on and  off  the  ‘field-of-play’  or  in a manner  that  is  contrary  to the  ‘spirit  of  cricket’;  and  (b)  a 
robust  disciplinary  procedure pursuant  to  which  all  matters  of  improper  conduct  can  be  dealt  with fairly, 
with certainty and in an expeditious manner. 

Unless otherwise indicated, references to Articles and Appendices are to articles and appendices of the 
Code of Conduct.  Words in italicised text in the Code of Conduct are defined terms and their definitions 
are set out in Appendix 1.  

ARTICLE 1 

SCOPE AND APPLICATION  

1.1 

All Players and Player Support Personnel are automatically bound by and required to comply with 
all  of  the  provisions  of  the  Code  of  Conduct.    Accordingly,  by  their  participation  (in  the  case  of  a 
Player)  or  assistance  in  a  Player’s  participation  (in  the case  of  a  Player  Support  Personnel)  in  an 
International Match, such Players or Player Support Personnel shall be deemed to have agreed: 

1.1.1 

that it is their personal responsibility to familiarise themselves with all of the requirements of 
the  Code  of  Conduct,  including  what  conduct  constitutes  an  offence  under  the  Code  of 
Conduct;  

1.1.2 

to  submit  to  the  exclusive  jurisdiction  of  any  Match  Referee,  Judicial  Commissioner  or 
Appeal Panel convened under the Code of Conduct to hear and determine charges brought 
(and any appeals in relation thereto) pursuant to the Code of Conduct; and 

1.1.3  not  to  bring  any  proceedings  in  any  court  or  other  forum  that  are  inconsistent  with  the 
foregoing  submission  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Match  Referee,  Judicial  Commissioner  or 
Appeal Panel.      

All Players and Player Support Personnel shall continue to be bound by and required to comply with 
the  Code  of  Conduct  until  he/she  has  not  participated  (in  the  case  of  a  Player),  or  assisted  a 
Player’s  participation  (in  the  case  of  a  Player  Support  Personnel)  in  an  International  Match  for  a 
period  of  three  (3) months and  the  ICC  shall  continue  to  have  jurisdiction  over  him/her  under  the 
Code of Conduct thereafter in respect of matters taking place prior to that point.   

Without  prejudice  to  Articles  1.1  and  1.2,  the  ICC  and  the  National  Cricket  Federations  shall  be 
responsible  for  promoting  Code  of  Conduct  awareness  and  education  amongst  all  Players  and 
Player Support Personnel. 

It is acknowledged that certain Players and Player Support Personnel may also be subject to other 
rules  of  National  Cricket  Federations  that  govern  discipline  and/or  conduct,  and  that  the  same 
conduct  of  such  Players  and/or  Player  Support  Personnel  may  implicate  not  only  the  Code  of 
Conduct  but  also  such  other  rules  that  may  apply.    For  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  Players  and 

1.2 

1.3 

1.4 

3 

 

 

Player Support Personnel acknowledge and agree that: (a) the Code of Conduct is not intended to 
limit the responsibilities of any Player or Player Support Personnel under such other rules; and (b) 
nothing in such other rules shall be capable of removing, superseding or amending in any way the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Match  Referee,  Judicial  Commissioner  or  Appeal  Panel  to  determine  matters 
properly arising pursuant to the Code of Conduct.     

1.5 

For the avoidance of any doubt: 

1.5.1  all Umpires and Match Referees officiating in any International Matches are automatically 
bound by and required to comply with all of the provisions of the ICC Code of Conduct for 
Umpires and Referees; and 

1.5.2  where  a  representative  side  of  a  National  Cricket  Federation  participates  in  an 
International Tour Match against a domestic or invitational team, for the purposes of their 
participation in such International Tour Match:  

1.5.2.1  all  Players  and  Player  Support  Personnel  representing  the  National  Cricket 
Federation’s representative side  are automatically  bound by, required to comply 
with, and shall submit themselves to the jurisdiction of this Code of Conduct; and  

1.5.2.2  all  players  or  player  support  personnel  representing  the  domestic  or  invitational 
team shall not be bound by this Code of Conduct.  Instead, such individuals will 
be  bound  by,  required  to  comply  with,  and  shall  submit  themselves  to  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  relevant  National  Cricket  Federation’s  own  applicable  rules  of 
conduct.   

ARTICLE 2 

CODE OF CONDUCT OFFENCES  

The conduct described  in  Articles 2.1  – 2.5,  if committed by a  Player or  Player  Support  Personnel shall 
amount to an offence by such Player or Player Support Personnel under the Code of Conduct. 

COMMENT: Where considered helpful, guidance notes have been provided in text boxes beneath the description of a 
particular  offence.    Such  notes  are  intended  only  to  provide  guidance  as  to  the  nature  and  examples  of  certain 
conduct  that  might  be  prohibited  by  a  particular  Article  and  should  not  be  read  as  an  exhaustive  or  limiting  list  of 
conduct prohibited by such Article.   

For the purposes of the Code of Conduct, the phrase “during an International Match” should be interpreted broadly to 
cover all conduct which takes place at the ground on the day of an International Match, and not just conduct which 
takes place on the field of play.  It will therefore include conduct which takes place off the field of play, for example in 
the changing rooms, or during any of the intervals in the match. 

For the avoidance of doubt, the ICC’s jurisdiction to take action against a Player or Player Support Personnel under 
this Code of Conduct is limited to incidents which take place during, or in relation to, an International Match or ICC 
Event.    In  circumstances  where  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  is  involved  in  an  off-field  incident  which  may 
warrant  action  under  this  Code  of  Conduct  and  any  code  of  conduct  or  disciplinary  rules  of  the  Player  or  Player 
Support Personnel’s National Cricket Federation, the ICC will consult with the relevant National Cricket Federation in 
order to determine what the most appropriate course of action against the Player or Player Support Personnel should 
be.   

2.1 

Level 1 Offences:  

2.1.1  Conduct that is contrary to the spirit of the game. 

NOTE: Article 2.1.1 is intended to cover all types of conduct of a minor nature that is contrary to the spirit of 
the game and which is not specifically and adequately covered by the specific offences set out elsewhere in 

4 

 

 

this Code of Conduct. The spirit of the game is defined by reference to the Preamble to the  ICC Standard 
Test Match, ODI and T20I Playing Conditions and involves respect for (a) your opponents, (b) your captain 
and team, (c) the role of the umpires and (d) the game and its traditional values.   

By way of example, Article 2.1.1 may (depending upon the seriousness and context of the breach) prohibit, 
without  limitation,  the  following:  (a)  the  use  of  an  illegal  bat  or  illegal  wicket-keeping  gloves;  (b)  cheating 
during an International Match, including deliberate attempts to mislead the Umpire; and (c) failure to comply 
with the provisions of clause 6.3 of the ICC Standard Test Match, ODI and T20I Playing Conditions. 

2.1.2  Conduct that brings the game into disrepute. 

NOTE:  Article  2.1.2  is  intended  to  cover  all  types  of  conduct  of  a  minor  nature  that  bring  the  game  into 
disrepute and which is not specifically and adequately covered by the specific offences set out elsewhere in 
this Code of Conduct, including Article 2.1.1.  

By way of example, Article 2.1.2 may (depending upon the seriousness and context of the breach) prohibit, 
without  limitation,  the  following:  (a)  public  acts  of  misconduct;  (b)  unruly  public  behavior;  and  (c) 
inappropriate comments which are detrimental to the interests of the game. 

2.1.3  Public  criticism  of,  or  inappropriate  comment  in  relation  to  an  incident  occurring  in  an 
International  Match  or  any  Player,  Player  Support  Personnel,  Match  official  or  team 
participating 
irrespective  of  when  such  criticism  or 
inappropriate comment is made. 

International  Match, 

in  any 

NOTE:  Without  limitation,  Players  and  Player  Support  Personnel  will  breach  Article  2.1.3  if  they  publicly 
criticise  the  Match  officials  or  denigrate  a  Player  or  team  against  which  they  have  played  in  relation  to 
incidents  which  occurred  in  an  International  Match.    When  assessing  the  seriousness  of  the  breach,  the 
context  within  which  the  comments  have  been  made  and  the  gravity  of  the  offending  comments  must  be 
taken into account.   

For the avoidance of doubt, any posting by a Player or Player Support Personnel of comments on a social 
media platform (including, without limitation, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Google+, Pinterest and LinkedIn) 
shall  be  deemed  to  be  ‘public’  for  the  purposes  of  this  offence.    Consequently  a  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel may breach Article 2.1.3 where they criticize or make an inappropriate comment in relation to an 
incident occurring in an International Match or any Player, Player Support Personnel, Match official or team 
participating in any International Match in any posting they make on a social media platform.   

2.1.4  Using language or a gesture that is obscene, offensive or insulting during an International 

Match. 

  
NOTE:  Article  2.1.4  includes:  (a)  excessively  audible  or  repetitious  swearing;  and  (b)  obscene  gestures 
which are not directed at another person, such as swearing in frustration at one’s own poor play or fortune. 
In addition, this offence is not intended to penalise trivial behaviour.  

When assessing the seriousness of the breach, the Umpire shall be required to take into account the context 
of  the  particular  situation  and  whether  the  words  or  gesture  are  likely  to:  (a)  be  regarded  as  obscene;  (b) 
give offence; or (c) insult another person.   

This offence is not intended to cover any use of language or gestures that are likely to offend another person 
on  the  basis  of  their  race,  religion,  gender,  colour,  descent,  national  or  ethnic  origin.    Such  conduct  is 
prohibited  under  the  ICC’s  Anti-Racism  Code  and  must  be  dealt  with  according  to  the  procedures  set  out 
therein. 

2.1.5  Showing dissent at an Umpire’s decision during an International Match. 

NOTE:  Article  2.1.5  includes:  (a)  excessive,  obvious  disappointment  with  an  Umpire’s  decision;  (b)  an 
obvious  delay  in  resuming  play  or  leaving  the  wicket;  (c)  shaking  the  head;  (d)  pointing  or  looking  at  the 

5 

 

 

inside  edge  when  given  out  lbw;  (e)  pointing  to  the  pad  or  rubbing  the  shoulder  when  caught  behind;  (f) 
snatching the cap from the Umpire; (g) requesting a referral to the TV Umpire (other than in the context of a 
legitimate request for a referral as may be permitted in such International Match); and (h) arguing or entering 
into a prolonged discussion with the Umpire about his/her decision. 

It shall not be a defence to any charge brought under this Article to show that the Umpire might have, or in 
fact did, get any decision wrong.  

2.1.6  Excessive appealing during an International Match. 

NOTE:  For  the  purposes  of  Article  2.1.6,  ‘excessive’  shall  include:  (a)  repeated  appealing  of  the  same 
decision/appeal;  (b)  repeated  appealing  of  different  decisions/appeals  when  the  bowler/fielder  knows  the 
batter is not out with the intention of placing the Umpire under pressure; or (c) celebrating a dismissal before 
the decision has been given. It is not intended to prevent loud or enthusiastic appealing.  

2.1.7  Using  language,  actions  or  gestures  which  disparage  or  which  could  provoke  an 
aggressive reaction from a batsman upon his/her dismissal during an International Match. 

NOTE:  Article  2.1.7  includes  any  language,  action  or  gesture  used  by  a  Player  and  directed  towards  a 
batsman  upon  his/her  dismissal  which  has  the  potential  to  provoke  an  aggressive  reaction  from  the 
dismissed  batsman,  whether  or  not  any  reaction  results,  or  which  could  be  considered  to  disparage  or 
demean the dismissed batsman, regardless of whether the batsman himself feels disparaged or demeaned.  
Without  limitation,  Article  2.1.7  includes:  (a)  excessive  celebration  directed at and in close  proximity  to  the 
dismissed batsman; and (b) verbally abusing the dismissed batsman.    

Nothing in this Article 2.1.7 is, however, intended to stop Players celebrating, in an appropriate fashion, the 
dismissal of the opposing team’s batsman. 

2.1.8  Abuse  of  cricket equipment  or  clothing,  ground  equipment  or  fixtures  and  fittings  during 

an International Match. 

NOTE:  Article  2.1.8  includes  any  action(s)  outside  the  course  of  normal  cricket  actions,  such  as  hitting  or 
kicking the wickets and any action(s) which intentionally or negligently results in damage to the advertising 
boards, boundary fences, dressing room doors, mirrors, windows and other fixtures and fittings. 

 
2.2 

Level 2 Offences: 

2.2.1  Conduct that is contrary to the spirit of the game. 

NOTE: Article 2.2.1 is intended to cover all types of conduct of a  serious nature that is contrary to the spirit 
of the game and which is not specifically and adequately covered by the specific offences set out elsewhere 
in this Code of Conduct. The spirit of the game is defined by reference to the Preamble to the ICC Standard 
Test Match, ODI and T20I Playing Conditions and involves respect for (a) your opponents, (b) your captain 
and team, (c) the role of the umpires and (d) the game and its traditional values. 

See guidance note to Article 2.1.1 for examples of conduct that may (depending upon the seriousness and 
context of the breach) be prohibited under Article 2.2.1. 

2.2.2  Conduct that brings the game into disrepute. 

NOTE:  Article  2.2.2 is intended  to cover  all  types  of  conduct  of  a  serious  nature  that  brings  the  game  into 
disrepute and which is not specifically and adequately covered by the specific offences set out elsewhere in 
this Code of Conduct, including Article 2.2.1. 

6 

 

 

See guidance note to Article 2.1.2 for examples of conduct that may (depending upon the seriousness and 
context of the breach) be prohibited under Article 2.2.2. 

2.2.3  Serious public criticism of, or inappropriate comment in relation to an incident occurring in 
an  International  Match  or  any  Player,  Player  Support  Personnel,  Match  official  or  team 
participating 
irrespective  of  when  such  criticism  or 
inappropriate comment is made. 

International  Match, 

in  any 

NOTE: Without limitation, Players and Player Support Personnel will breach this rule if they publicly criticise 
the  Match  officials  or  denigrate  a  Player  or  team  against  which  they  have  played  in  relation  to  incidents 
which occurred in an International Match.  When assessing the seriousness of the breach, the context within 
which  the  comments  have  been  made  and  the  gravity  of  the  offending  comments  must  be  taken  into 
account.   

For the avoidance of doubt, any posting by a Player or Player Support Personnel of comments on a social 
media platform (including, without limitation, Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, Google+, Pinterest and LinkedIn) 
shall  be  deemed  to  be  ‘public’  for  the  purposes  of  this  offence.    Consequently  a  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel  may  breach  Article  2.2.3  where  they  seriously  criticize  or  make  an  inappropriate  comment  in 
relation  to  an  incident  occurring  in  an  International  Match or  any  Player,  Player  Support  Personnel,  Match 
official or team participating in any International Match in any posting they make on a social media platform.   

2.2.4  Using  language  or  gesture(s)  that  is  seriously  obscene,  seriously  offensive  or  of  a 
seriously  insulting  nature  to  another  Player,  Player  Support  Personnel,  Umpire,  Match 
Referee or any other third person during an International Match.   

 
NOTE:  It  is  acknowledged  that  there  will  be  verbal  exchanges  between  Players  in  the  course  of  play.  
Rather than seeking to eliminate these exchanges entirely, Umpires will be required to report such conduct 
that falls below an acceptable standard.  This offence is not intended to penalise trivial behaviour. 

When assessing the seriousness of the breach, the Umpire shall be required to take into account the context 
of  the  particular  situation  and  whether  the  words  or  gesture  are  likely  to:  (a)  be  regarded  as  seriously 
obscene; or (b) give serious offence; or (c) seriously insult another person.   

This offence is not intended to cover any use of language or gestures that are likely to offend another person 
on  the  basis  of  their  race,  religion,  gender,  colour,  descent,  national  or  ethnic  origin.    Such  conduct  is 
prohibited  under  the  ICC’s  Anti-Racism  Code  and  must  be  dealt  with  according  to  the  procedures  set  out 
therein. 

 

2.2.5  Showing serious dissent at an Umpire’s decision during an International Match. 
 
NOTE: Dissent, including the examples given in Article 2.1.5 above will be classified as ‘serious’ when the 
conduct contains an element of anger or abuse which is directed at the Umpire or the Umpire’s decision or 
where  there  is  excessive  delay  in  resuming  play  or  leaving  the  wicket  or  where  there  is  persistent  re-
reference to the incident over time. 

 

It shall not be a defence to any charge brought under this Article to show that the Umpire might have, or in 
fact did, get any decision wrong. 

 
2.2.6  Charging  or  advancing  towards  the  Umpire  in  an  aggressive  manner  when  appealing 

during an International Match. 

 
2.2.7 

 

Inappropriate and deliberate physical contact with a Player, Player Support Personnel or 
any  other  Person  (including  a  spectator)  in  the  course  of  play  during  an  International 
Match. 

7 

 

 

NOTE: Without limitation, Players will breach this regulation if they deliberately walk or run into  or shoulder 
another Player.   

2.2.8  Throwing a ball (or any other item of cricket equipment such as a water bottle) at or near 
a Player, Player Support Personnel, Umpire, Match Referee or any other third person in 
an inappropriate and/or dangerous manner during an International Match. 

 
NOTE: This regulation will not prohibit a fielder or bowler from returning the ball to the stumps in the normal 
fashion. 

2.2.9  Changing  the  condition  of  the  ball  in  breach  of  clause  41.3  of  the  ICC  Standard  Test 

Match, ODI and T20I Playing Conditions.    

 
NOTE:  This  offence  supplements  and  does  not  replace  ICC  Standard  Test  Match,  ODI  and  T20I  Playing 
Conditions clause 41.3.  

Any action(s) likely to alter the condition of the ball which were not specifically permitted under clause 41.3.2 
may be regarded as ‘unfair’. The following actions shall not be permitted (this list of actions is not exhaustive 
but  included  for  illustrative  purposes):  (a)  deliberately  throwing  the  ball  into  the  ground  for  the  purpose  of 
roughening  it up;  (b)  applying  any artificial substance  to  the  ball;  and  applying any  non-artificial  substance 
for any purpose other than to polish the ball; (c)  lifting or otherwise interfering with any of the seams of the 
ball; (d) scratching the surface of the ball with finger or thumb nails or any implement.  

The  Umpires  shall  use  their  judgment  to  apply  the  principle  that  actions  taken  to  maintain  or  enhance  the 
condition  of  the  ball, provided  no  artificial substances  are  used, shall be permitted.  Any  actions  taken  with 
the purpose of damaging the condition of the ball or accelerating the deterioration of the condition of the ball 
shall not be permitted. 
 
2.2.10  Any  of  the  following  conduct  which  constitutes  ‘unfair  play’  under  clause  41  of  the  ICC 

Standard Test Match, ODI and T20I Playing Conditions clause 41: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  

2.2.10.1 

deliberate attempt to distract striker; 

2.2.10.2 

deliberate distraction, deception or obstruction of batsman; 

2.2.10.3 

bowling of dangerous and unfair short pitched deliveries; 

2.2.10.4 

bowling of dangerous and unfair non-pitching deliveries; 

2.2.10.5 

bowling of deliberate front foot no balls; 

2.2.10.6 

time wasting by any Player or team; 

2.2.10.7 

fielder causing deliberate or avoidable damage to the pitch; 

2.2.10.8 

bowler running on protected area: 

2.2.10.9 

batsman causing deliberate or avoidable damage to the pitch; 

2.2.10.10 

striker in the protected area; 

2.2.10.11 

batsman stealing a run; 

2.2.10.12 

unfair  actions  not  covered  elsewhere  in  clause  41  of  the  ICC  Standard 
Test Match, ODI and T20I Playing Conditions. 

8 

 

 

 
NOTE:  This offence supplements and does not replace ICC Standard Test Match, ODI and  T20I Playing 
Conditions clauses 41.4 to 41.19. 
 
 
2.2.11  Any  attempt  to  manipulate  an  International  Match  for  inappropriate  strategic  or  tactical 

reasons. 

 
NOTE:  Article  2.2.11  is  intended  to  prevent  the  manipulation  of  International  Matches  for  inappropriate 
strategic or tactical reasons (such as when a team deliberately loses a pool Match in an ICC Event in order 
to  affect  the  standings  of  other  teams  in  that  ICC  Event).    It  might  also  apply  to  the  inappropriate 
manipulation of a net run rate or accumulation of bonus points or otherwise.  
 
Article 2.2.11 is not intended to cover any corrupt or fraudulent acts (including any use of inside information 
and/or related betting activity).  Such conduct is prohibited under the ICC’s Anti-Corruption Code and must 
be dealt with according to the procedures set out therein.   
 
The Team Captain of any team guilty of such conduct shall be held responsible (and subject to sanction) for 
any offence found to have been committed under this Article. 

2.3 

 
Level 3 Offences:   

2.3.1  Conduct that is contrary to the spirit of the game. 

NOTE: Article 2.3.1 is intended to cover all types of conduct of a  very serious nature that is contrary to the 
spirit  of  the  game  and  which  is  not  specifically  and  adequately  covered  by  the  specific  offences  set  out 
elsewhere in this Code of Conduct. The spirit of the game is defined by reference to the Preamble to the ICC 
Standard Test Match. ODI and T20I Playing Conditions and involves respect for (a) your opponents, (b) your 
captain and team, (c) the role of the umpires and (d) the game and its traditional values. 

See guidance note to Article 2.1.1 for examples of conduct that may (depending upon the seriousness and 
context of the breach) be prohibited under Article 2.3.1. 

2.3.2  Conduct that brings the game into disrepute. 

NOTE: Article 2.3.2 is intended to cover all types of conduct of a  very serious nature that brings the game 
into  disrepute  and  which  is  not  specifically  and  adequately  covered  by  the  specific  offences  set  out 
elsewhere in this Code of Conduct, including Article 2.3.1. 

See guidance note to Article 2.1.2 for examples of conduct that may (depending upon the seriousness and 
context of the breach) be prohibited under Article 2.3.2. 

2.3.3 

Intimidation  of  an  Umpire  or  Match  Referee  whether  by  language  or  conduct  (including 
gestures) during an International Match. 

 

NOTE: Includes appealing in an aggressive or threatening manner. 

2.3.4  Threat  of  assault  on  another  Player,  Player  Support  Personnel  or  any  other  person 

(including a spectator) during an International Match. 

 
NOTE:  This  offence  is  not intended to  cover threats  of assault  against  Umpires  or  Match  Referees,  which 
are prohibited under Article 2.4.3. 

2.4 

Level 4 Offences:   

9 

 

 

2.4.1  Conduct that is contrary to the spirit of the game. 

NOTE:  Article  2.4.1  is  intended  to  cover  all  types  of  conduct  of  an  overwhelmingly  serious  nature  that  is 
contrary  to  the  spirit  of  the  game  and  which  is  not  specifically  and  adequately  covered  by  the  specific 
offences  set  out  elsewhere  in  this  Code  of  Conduct.  The  spirit  of  the  game  is  defined  by  reference  to  the 
Preamble  to  the  ICC  Standard  Test  Match,  ODI  and  T20I  Playing  Conditions  and  involves  respect  for  (a) 
your opponents, (b) your captain and team, (c) the role of the umpires and (d) the game and its traditional 
values. 

See guidance note to Article 2.1.1 for examples of conduct that may (depending upon the seriousness and 
context of the breach) be prohibited under Article 2.4.1. 

2.4.2  Conduct that brings the game into disrepute. 

NOTE: Article 2.4.2 is intended to cover all types of conduct of an overwhelmingly serious nature that brings 
the game into disrepute and which is not specifically and adequately covered by the specific offences set out 
elsewhere in this Code of Conduct, including Article 2.4.1. 

See guidance note to Article 2.1.2 for examples of conduct that may (depending upon the seriousness and 
context of the breach) be prohibited under Article 2.4.2. 

2.4.3  Threat of assault on an Umpire or Match Referee during an International Match. 
 
2.4.4 

Inappropriate and deliberate physical contact with an Umpire or Match Referee during an 
International Match. 

 
2.4.5  Physical assault of another Player, Player Support Personnel, Umpire, Match Referee or 

any other person (including a spectator) during an International Match. 

 
2.4.6  Any act of violence on the field of play during an International Match. 
 
Minimum Over Rate Offences:   

2.5 

Failure by a fielding team participating in an International Match to meet the Minimum Over Rate 
requirements contained in Appendix 2 constitutes an offence under this Code of Conduct by the 
relevant Team Captain and each of the Players in that fielding team according to the following:  
 
2.5.1  where the actual over rate in any Test Match or any other International Match of at least 
four  days  in  duration  is  up  to  (and  including)  five  overs  short  of  the  Minimum  Over 
 
Rate, or, in any One Day International Match, Twenty20 International Match or any other 
 
 
International  Match  of  fifty  (50)  or  twenty  (20)  overs  per  side,  up  to  (and  including)  two 
overs  short  of  the  Minimum  Over  Rate,  such  an  offence  shall  be  considered  a  “Minor 
 
 
Over Rate Offence”.   
 
2.5.2  where the actual over rate in any Test Match or any other International Match of at least 
four days in duration is more than five overs short of the  Minimum Over Rate, or, in any 
One  Day  International  Match,  Twenty20  International  Match  or  any  other  International 
Match  of  fifty  (50)  or  twenty  (20)  overs  per  side,  is  more  than  two  overs  short  of  the 
Minimum  Over  Rate,  such  an  offence  shall  be  considered  a  “Serious  Over  Rate 
Offence”.   

 
NOTE:  Subjective  intent  on  behalf  of  the  Team  Captain  to  waste  time  is  not  required.    It  is  sufficient  to 
establish that the Minimum Over Rate was not met.  To avoid liability under this offence the Team Captain 
would need to establish, on the balance of probabilities, that the shortfall was due to factors beyond his/her 
control  and  that  the  time  allowances  permitted  by  the  Match  officials  in  calculating  the  required  over  rate 

10 

 

 

were  not  sufficient.  The  presence  or  absence  of  subjective  intent  and  the  extent  of  the  shortfall  shall  be 
relevant in relation to the issue of penalty.   

The  identity  of  the  relevant  Team  Captain  for  the  purposes  of  this  Article  2.5  and  Appendix  2  shall  be 
determined in accordance with clause 1.3 of the ICC Standard Test Match, ODI and T20I Playing Conditions 
applicable to the particular International Match. 

ARTICLE 3 

REPORTING AN ALLEGED OFFENCE UNDER THE CODE OF CONDUCT  

NOTE:   Where  a  Code  of  Conduct  offence  is  alleged  to  have  occurred  during,  or  in  relation  to  an 
International Match that is played as part of an ICC Event, the Code of Conduct shall apply in full, but with a 
series  of  amendments  to  the  reporting  process  (Article  3),  disciplinary  procedure  (Article  5)  and  appeal 
process  (Article  8)  in  order  to  ensure  that  any  matters  arising  can  be  dealt  with  expediently.    Such 
amendments are described in detail in Appendix 4.   
 
Where  a  Minimum  Over  Rate  Offence  may  have  occurred,  see  Appendix  2  for  the  reporting  process, 
disciplinary process and sanctions that are to be applied.  

 

3.1 

3.2 

Any  one  of  the  following  individuals  can  report  an  alleged  offence  under  the  Code  of  Conduct 
(other than Minimum Over Rate Offences - as to which see Appendix 2) by lodging a report in the 
manner described in Article 3.2, below (a “Report”):  

3.1.1  an Umpire that officiated in the International Match during which the alleged offence was 

committed;   

 
3.1.2 

the  CEO  of  either  of  the  two  National  Cricket  Federations  whose  representative  teams 
participated in the International Match during, or in relation to which, the alleged offence 
was  committed,  or  his/her  designee  (provided  that  the  identity  of  such  designee  is 
advised  to  the  ICC  by  the  National  Cricket  Federation  in  advance  of,  or  at  least  at  the 
same time as, the Report is lodged);  

the ICC’s Chief Executive Officer; or 

 
3.1.3 
 
3.1.4  provided  it  is  a  Level  3  Offence  or  Level  4  Offence  that  is  alleged  to  have  been 
committed, the  Match  Referee  that  was  appointed  to  officiate  in  the  International  Match 
during  which  the  alleged  offence  was  committed.    (For  the avoidance  of  any  doubt,  the 
Match Referee is not entitled to lodge a Report in relation to an alleged Level 1 Offence 
or Level 2 Offence).    

 
All Reports must be completed on Form “Rep 1” (or such other form as may be made available 
for  such  purpose  by  the  ICC  from  time  to  time).    All  Reports  must  be  signed  and  dated  by  the 
person lodging the Report.      

3.2.1  Where the Report is lodged by any of the individuals described in Articles 3.1.1 or 3.1.2 in 
 

relation to: 

3.2.1.1  a Level 1 Offence or a Level 2 Offence that is alleged to have been committed on 
the  field  of  play  during  an  International  Match,  then  the  Report  must  be  lodged 
with the Match Referee (or, where, for logistical reasons, it is impractical to lodge 
with the Match Referee, the ICC’s Cricket Operations Department) (a) where the 
Report  is  lodged  by  an  Umpire,  within  eighteen  hours  of  the  close  of  the  day’s 
play in the relevant International Match or prior to the start of the following day’s 
play or the start of the next relevant International Match, whichever is the sooner 
or (b) where the Report is lodged by the CEO of either of the two National Cricket 

11 

 

 

Federations (or his/her designee), as soon as reasonably practicable, and in any 
event  no  later  than  forty-eight  (48)  hours  after  the  close of  the  day’s  play  in the 
relevant International Match; or  

3.2.1.2  a Level 1 Offence or a Level 2 Offence that is alleged to have been committed at 
any time or place other than on the field of play then the Report must be lodged 
with the Match Referee (or, where, for logistical reasons, it is impractical to lodge 
with  the  Match  Referee,  the  ICC’s  Cricket  Operations  Department)  as  soon  as 
reasonably  practicable,  and  in  any  event,  no  later  than  forty-eight  (48)  hours 
(where  the  Report  is  lodged  by  an  Umpire)  or  ninety-six  (96)  hours  (where  the 
Report is lodged by the CEO of either of the two National Cricket Federations (or 
his/her  designee))  after:  (a)  the  commission  of  the  alleged  offence;  or  (b)  the 
alleged offence was brought to the attention of the person lodging the Report; or  

3.2.1.3  a Level  3 Offence or a  Level 4 Offence that is alleged to have been committed, 
then  the  Report  must  be  lodged  with  the  ICC’s  General  Counsel  as  soon  as 
reasonably practicable, and in any event no later than seven (7) days after either: 
(a) the commission of the alleged offence; or (b) the alleged offence was brought 
to the attention of the person lodging the Report.   

3.2.2  Where the Report is lodged by the individual described in Article 3.1.3 in relation to: 

3.2.2.1  a Level 1 Offence or a Level 2 Offence that is alleged to have been committed at 
any  time  or  place  (whether  on  the  field  of  play  or  otherwise),  then  the  Report 
must  be  lodged  with  the  Match  Referee  (or,  where,  for  logistical  reasons,  it  is 
impractical  to  lodge  with  the  Match  Referee,  the  ICC’s  Cricket  Operations 
Department) within five (5) days of the commission of the alleged offence; or 

3.2.2.2  a Level 3 Offence or a Level 4 Offence that is alleged to have been committed at 
any  time  or  place  (whether  on  the  field  of  play  or  otherwise),  then  the  Report 
must  be  lodged  with  the  ICC’s  General  Counsel  as  soon  as  reasonably 
practicable,  and  in  any  event  no  later  than  seven  (7)  days  after:  (a)  the 
commission of the alleged offence; or (b) the alleged offence was brought to the 
attention of the ICC’s Chief Executive Officer.   

3.2.3  Where  the  Report  is  lodged  by  the  individual  described  in  Article  3.1.4  in  relation  to  a 
Level  3  Offence  or  a  Level  4  Offence  that  is  alleged  to  have  been  committed,  then  the 
Report  must  be  lodged  with  the  ICC’s  General  Counsel  as  soon  as  reasonably 
practicable, and in any event no later than seven (7) days after: (a) the commission of the 
alleged  offence;  or  (b)  the  alleged  offence  was  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  Match 
Referee.   

3.3 

Where  it  is  alleged  that  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  has  committed  more  than  one 
offence  under  the  Code  of  Conduct  during,  or  in  relation  to  an  International  Match  (whether 
arising  out  of  the  same  set  of  facts  or  otherwise),  then  a  separate  Report  should  be  filed  in 
accordance with this Article 3 for each of the offences that are alleged to have been committed.   

 

 

NOTE: For the avoidance of doubt, only one Report should be laid per offence.  As such, where the incident 
in question could fall within more than one offence under Article 2, for example Article 2.2.4 (serious public 
criticism or inappropriate comment) and Article 2.2.2 (conduct of a serious nature that brings  the game into 
disrepute) a Report should be laid only in respect of the offence which most specifically covers the relevant 
conduct (in the example above, Article 2.2.4) and not both offences.  

12 

 

 

ARTICLE 4 

NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE  

 

Level 1 Offences, Level 2 Offences and Minimum Over Rate Offences: 

4.1 

Where a Match Referee receives a Report lodged under Articles 3.2.1.1, 3.2.1.2, 3.2.2.1 or Article 
3.2 of Appendix 2 (in the case of Minimum Over Rate Offences), he/she must promptly provide a 
copy  of  the  Report,  together  with  a  completed  Form  “Not  1”,  (such  documents  comprising  the 
‘Notice of Charge’), to the following individuals:   

4.1.1 

the Player or Player Support Personnel named in the Report, or, where appropriate in the 
case of  an  offence under  either  Article  2.2.9 (changing  the condition of  the  ball),  2.2.10 
(manipulating  an  International  Match),  or  2.5.1/2.5.2  (failure  to  meet  the  Minimum  Over 
Rate), the relevant Team Captain; and 

4.1.2 

the  Team  Manager  of  the  relevant  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  named  in  the 
Report. 

4.2 

The  Notice  of  Charge  shall  specify  that  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  shall  have  the 
following three options: 

4.2.1  he/she may admit the offence charged and accede to the proposed sanction specified in 
the  Notice  of Charge  (which  sanction  shall  be  strictly  at the  Match Referee’s  discretion, 
but  at  all  times  within  the  appropriate  range  for  the  level  of  offence).    In  such 
circumstances,  and  provided  that  such  admission  has  been  received  by  the  Match 
Referee  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  hearing  at  the  time/place  specified  in  the 
Notice  of  Charge,  the  hearing  before  the  Match  Referee  shall  not  be  required  and  no 
further  action  shall  be  taken,  save  that  the  ICC  shall  promptly  issue  a  public  statement 
confirming:  (a)  the  commission  of  an  offence  under  the  Code  of  Conduct;  and  (b)  the 
imposition of the applicable sanction specified in the Notice of Charge; or 

4.2.2   he/she may admit the offence charged but dispute the proposed sanction specified in the 
Notice of Charge, in which case the matter shall proceed to a hearing in accordance with 
Article 5.1; or 

4.2.3  he/she  may  deny  the  offence  charged,  in  which  case  the  matter  shall  proceed  to  a 

hearing in accordance with Article 5.1.   

Level 3 Offences and Level 4 Offences: 

4.3 

4.4 

Where  the  ICC’s  General  Counsel  receives  a  Report  lodged  under  Articles  3.2.1.3,  3.2.2.2  or 
3.2.3, he/she must promptly conduct a review to determine whether the Player or Player Support 
Personnel named in the Report has a case to answer in relation to the specific type and/or level 
of  offence  identified  in  the  Report  (i.e.  to  determine,  in  the  ICC’s  opinion,  whether  the  specific 
type  and  level  of  offence  noted  in  the  Report  is  properly  identified  when  reviewed  against  the 
conduct complained of).  

If the initial review of the Report reveals that there is no case to answer in relation to the specific 
type and/or level of offence, then the ICC shall notify the person who filed the Report of that fact, 
advising  them  of  the  reasons  that  such  a  determination  has  been  made  and,  where  applicable, 
providing  guidance  on  which  specific  type  and  level  of  offence  the  ICC  considers  to  be 
appropriate.    Upon  receipt  of  such  a  decision,  the  person  who  filed  the  Report  shall, 
notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  Article  3.2  and  having  considered  the  ICC’s  guidance  in  good 
faith,  within a period of twenty-four (24) hours from the time of notification by the ICC, notify the 
ICC whether he/she wishes to: (a) revise the specific type and/or level of the offence charged, in 

13 

 

 

4.5 

which case a revised Report must be lodged with the ICC within such twenty-four (24) period; (b) 
proceed on the basis of the original Report lodged; or (c) withdraw the Report.   

If  the  initial  review  of  the  Report  reveals  that  there  is  a  case  to  answer,  or  a  revised  Report  is 
lodged  with  the  ICC  pursuant  to  Article  4.4,  then  the  ICC  shall  promptly  provide  a  copy  of  the 
Report,  together  with  a  completed  Form  “Not  1”  (such  documents  comprising  the  ‘Notice  of 
Charge’) to the following individuals:   

4.5.1 

the Player or Player Support Personnel named in the Report; and 

4.5.2 

the  Team  Manager  of  the  relevant  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  named  in  the 
Report; and 

4.5.3 

the  CEO  of  the  National  Cricket  Federation  to  which  the  relevant  Player  or  Player 
Support Personnel is affiliated.  

4.6 
 

The  Notice  of  Charge  shall  specify  that  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  shall  have  the 
following options:   

4.6.1  he/she may admit the offence charged and accede to the proposed sanction specified in 
the  Notice  of  Charge  (which  sanction  shall  be  strictly  at  the  ICC’s  discretion,  but  at  all 
times within the appropriate range for the  level of offence).  In such circumstances,  and 
provided that  such  admission  has  been  received  by  the  ICC’s  General  Counsel  prior  to 
the commencement of the hearing at the time/place specified in the Notice of Charge, the 
hearing before the Judicial Commissioner shall not be required and no further action shall 
be  taken,  save  that  the  ICC  shall  promptly  issue  a  public  statement  confirming:  (a)  the 
commission  of  an  offence  under  the  Code  of  Conduct;  and  (b)  the  imposition  of  the 
applicable sanction specified in the Notice of Charge; or 

4.6.2   he/she may admit the offence charged but dispute the proposed sanction specified in the 
Notice of Charge, in which case the matter shall proceed to a hearing in accordance with 
Article 5.2; or 

4.6.3  he/she  may  deny  the  offence  charged,  in  which  case  the  matter  shall  proceed  to  a 

hearing in accordance with Article 5.2.    

 

ARTICLE 5 

THE DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE 

NOTE: Where a Match Referee appointed to adjudicate any matter brought under this Code of Conduct is 
not  physically  present  at  the  relevant  International  Match  (and  therefore  required  to  perform  his/her  duties 
remotely)  then  all  hearings  arising  under  Article  5.1  will  be  held  by  telephone  conference  or  video 
conference (if available) and the provisions of Article 5.1 are to be interpreted accordingly.   
 

Level 1 Offences, Level 2 Offences and Minimum Over Rate Offences:  

5.1 
 

Where a matter proceeds to a hearing under Article 4.2.2 or 4.2.3, then the case shall be  referred 
to the Match Referee for adjudication in accordance with the following procedure:  

5.1.1  Subject to the discretion of the  Match Referee to order otherwise for good cause shown 
by  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel,  the  hearing  will  take  place  at  the  time 
specified  in  the  Notice  of  Charge  (which  should,  in  the  absence  of  exceptional 
circumstances,  be  no  more  than  thirty-six  (36)  hours  after  the  receipt  by  the  Player  or 

14 

 

 

Player Support Personnel of the Notice of Charge) and, subject to the note to Article 5, in 
the  country  in  which  the  alleged  offence  was  committed.    For  the  avoidance  of  doubt, 
nothing  in  this  Article  5.1.1  prevents  a  hearing  from  being  convened  at  a  time  during 
which the International Match in relation to which the alleged offence took place, remains 
in progress.  

5.1.2  The  procedure  followed  at  the  hearing  shall  be  at  the  discretion  of  the  Match  Referee, 
provided  that  the  hearing  is  conducted  in  a  manner  which  offers  the  Player  or  Player 
Support  Personnel  a  fair  and  reasonable  opportunity  to  present  evidence  (including  the 
right  to  call  and  to  question  witnesses  by  telephone  or  video-conference  where 
necessary), address the Match Referee and present his/her case. 

5.1.3  The  hearing  before  the  Match  Referee  shall  be  in  English,  and  certified  English 
translations  shall  be  submitted  of  any  non-English  documents  put  before  the  Match 
Referee.  The cost of the translation shall be borne by the party offering the document(s).   

5.1.4  Where video evidence of the alleged offence is available at the hearing before the Match 
Referee, then it may be relied upon by any party, provided that all other parties shall have 
the right to make such representations in relation to it that they may see fit.   

5.1.5  Unless  exceptional  circumstances  apply,  each  of  the  following  individuals  must  attend 
any  hearing before  the  Match  Referee:  (a)  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  who 
has  been  charged  with  the  alleged  offence;  and  (b)  the  person  who  lodged  the  Report 
(or,  in  the  case  of  the  ICC’s  Chief  Executive  Officer,  his/her  representative/nominee).  
Where any such individual has a compelling justification for his/her non-attendance, then 
they shall be given the opportunity to participate in the hearing before the Match Referee 
by telephone or video conference (if available).  Without prejudice to the Player or Player 
Support Personnel’s ability to call and to question such witnesses as may be necessary 
and/or  to  be  represented  by  such  other  person  of  his/her  own  choosing  pursuant  to 
Article 5.1.6, one of the Team Captain, Team Vice-Captain or Team Manager of the team 
that the Player or Player Support Personnel represents may also attend such a hearing to 
provide additional support and assistance to the Player or Player Support Personnel.   

5.1.6  Each of the individuals described in Article 5.1.5(a) and (b) shall have the right (at his/her 
or its own expense) to be represented at the hearing before the  Match Referee by such 
representative (including legal counsel) of his/her or its own choosing.  Where the person 
lodging  the  Report  is  an  Umpire  that  officiated  in  the  International  Match  in  question  or 
the  ICC’s  Chief  Executive  Officer,  then  such  person  shall  be  entitled  to  be  represented 
prior  to,  and  during,  the  hearing  (if  he/she  considers  necessary)  by  a  representative  of 
the ICC’s Legal Department.   

5.1.7  The non-attendance of any Player or Player Support Personnel or his/her representative 
at the hearing, shall not prevent the  Match Referee from proceeding  with the hearing in 
his/her absence and issuing a ruling in relation to the offence charged.   

5.1.8  At  the  end  of  a  hearing,  where  the  Match  Referee  considers  that  further  evidence  is 
necessary  or further time is required to consider the  evidence that  has  been presented, 
he/she  shall  adjourn  the  hearing  for  an  appropriate  period  of  time  and  make  such 
directions as may be necessary.   

5.1.9  Alternatively, at the end of a hearing:  

5.1.9.1 

brought under Article 4.2.2:  

15 

 

 

(a)  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  (and,  in  any 
event, no later than forty-eight (48) hours thereafter), the Match Referee 
will  confirm  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  admission  that 
he/she had committed a Code of Conduct offence and announce his/her 
decision  in  writing,  with  reasons,  setting  out:  (a)  what  sanctions,  if  any, 
are  to  be  imposed  (including  any  fine  and/or  period  of  suspension);  (b) 
the  date that any period of suspension shall come into force and effect; 
and (c) any rights of appeal that may exist pursuant to Article 8. 

 5.1.9.2 

brought under Article 4.2.3 (or where the Player or Player Support Personnel 
has failed to respond in a timely fashion to the Notice of Charge):  

(a) 

the Match Referee shall adjourn the hearing (for a period of no less than 
ten  (10)  minutes  and  no  more  than  twenty-four  (24)  hours),  following 
which  he/she  will  reconvene  the  hearing  and  verbally  announce  his/her 
finding as to whether a Code of Conduct offence has been committed; 

(b)  where  the  Match  Referee  determines  that  a  Code  of  Conduct  offence 
has  been  committed,  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  may 
request  a  short  adjournment  (of  no  more  than  thirty  (30)  minutes)  to 
prepare  any  submissions  that  he/she  might  wish  to  make  in  relation  to 
the appropriate sanction that ought to be applied; and   

(c)  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  (and,  in  any 
event, no later than forty-eight (48) hours thereafter), the Match Referee 
will announce his/her decision in writing, with reasons, setting out: (a) the 
finding  as  to  whether  a  Code  of  Conduct  offence  had  been  committed; 
(b)  what  sanctions,  if  any,  are  to  be  imposed  (including  any  fine  and/or 
period  of  suspension);  (c)  the  date  that  any  period  of  suspension  shall 
come  into  force  and  effect;  and  (d)  any  rights  of  appeal  that  may  exist 
pursuant to Article 8. 

5.1.10  The  Match  Referee  shall  have  the  discretion  to  announce  the  substance  of  his/her 

decision prior to the issue of the written reasoned decision referred to in Article 5.1.9.    

5.1.11  A copy of the written reasoned decision will be provided to the Player or Player Support 
Personnel,  the  CEO  of  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  National  Cricket 
Federation, and the ICC’s Cricket Operations Manager. 

5.1.12  Subject only to the rights of appeal under Article 8, the Match Referee’s decision shall be 

the full, final and complete disposition of the matter and will be binding on all parties. 

Level 3 Offences and Level 4 Offences: 

5.2 

Where a matter proceeds to a hearing under Article 4.6.2 or 4.6.3, then the case shall be referred 
to a Judicial Commissioner for adjudication in accordance with the following procedure: 

5.2.1  As soon as reasonably possible, the ICC shall appoint one member from the ICC’s Code 
of  Conduct  Commission  to  sit  as  the  Judicial  Commissioner  to  hear  the  case  sitting 
alone.    The  appointed  member  shall  be  independent  of  the  parties,  have  had  no  prior 
involvement with the case and shall not, unless otherwise agreed between the parties, be 
from a country participating in the International Match, during, or in relation to which, the 
alleged offence was committed.   

16 

 

 

5.2.2  The  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  convene  a  preliminary  hearing  with  the  individual 
lodging  the  Report  pursuant  to  Article  3.1  (the  Complainant)  and  his/her  legal 
representatives (if any), together with the Player or Player Support Personnel and his/her 
legal  representatives  (if  any).    The  preliminary  hearing  should  take  place  as  soon  as 
possible  by  telephone  conference  call  unless  the  Judicial  Commissioner  determines 
otherwise.  The non-participation, without compelling justification, of the Player or Player 
Support Personnel or his/her representative at the preliminary hearing, after proper notice 
of 
the  Judicial 
Commissioner  from  proceeding  with  the  preliminary  hearing,  whether  or  not  any  written 
submissions are made on behalf of the  Player or Player Support Personnel.  Where the 
initial Report was lodged by someone other than the individual described in Article 3.1.3, 
the  ICC  will  be  notified  and  invited  to  participate  in  any  such  preliminary  hearing 
convened by the Judicial Commissioner through its representative.  

the  preliminary  hearing  has  been  provided,  shall  not  prevent 

5.2.3  The  purpose  of  the  preliminary  hearing  shall  be  to  allow  the  Judicial  Commissioner  to 
address  any  preliminary  issues  that  need  to  be  resolved  prior  to  the  hearing  date.    In 
particular (but without limitation), the Judicial Commissioner shall: 

5.2.3.1  determine  the  date(s)  upon  which  the  full  hearing  shall  be  held.    Save  in 
exceptional circumstances or where the parties otherwise agree, the  full hearing 
 
should  take  place  no  longer  than  fourteen  (14)  days  after  the  receipt  by  the 
 
 
Player or Player Support Personnel of the Notice of Charge.   

 

5.2.3.2  establish dates reasonably in advance of the date of the full hearing by which: 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

the  Complainant  shall  submit  an  opening  brief  with  argument  on  all 
issues that the Complainant wishes to raise at the hearing and a list of 
the witnesses that the Complainant intends to call at the hearing (and a 
summary  of  the  subject  areas  of  the  witness’s  anticipated  testimony), 
and  enclosing  copies  of  the  exhibits  that  the  Complainant  intends  to 
introduce at the hearing; 

the Player or Player Support Personnel shall submit an answering brief, 
addressing  the  Complainant’s  arguments  and  setting  out  argument  on 
the issues that he/she wishes to raise at the hearing, as well as a list of 
the witnesses that he/she intends to call at the hearing (and a summary 
of  the  subject  areas  of  the  witness’s  anticipated  testimony),  and 
enclosing  copies  of  the  exhibits  that  he/she  intends  to introduce at  the 
hearing; and 

the Complainant may (at its discretion) submit a reply brief, responding 
to the answer brief of the Player or Player Support Personnel and listing 
any  rebuttal  witnesses  that  the  Complainant  intends  to  call  at  the 
hearing  (and  a  summary  of  the  subject  areas  of  the  witness’s 
anticipated  testimony),  and  enclosing  copies  of  any  other  exhibits  that 
the Complainant intends to introduce at the hearing; and 

5.2.3.3  make such order as the Judicial Commissioner shall deem appropriate in relation 
to  the  production  of  relevant  documents  and/or  other  materials  between  the 
parties. 

5.2.4  Subject to the discretion of the Judicial Commissioner to order otherwise for good cause 
shown  by  either  party,  or  if  otherwise  agreed  between  the  parties,  hearings  before  the 
Judicial  Commissioner  shall  take  place  in  the  country  in  which  the  alleged  offence  was 
committed.  

17 

 

 

5.2.5  The  procedure  followed  at  the  hearing  shall  be  at  the  discretion  of  the  Judicial 
Commissioner,  provided  that  the  hearing  is  conducted  in  a  manner  which  offers  the 
Player or Player Support Personnel a fair and reasonable opportunity to present evidence 
(including  the  right  to  call  and  to  question  witnesses  by  telephone  or  video-conference 
where necessary), address the Judicial Commissioner and present his/her case.  

5.2.6  The  hearing  before  the  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  be  in  English,  and  certified  English 
translations  shall  be  submitted  of  any  non-English  documents  put  before  the  Judicial 
Commissioner.    The  cost  of  the  translation  shall  be  borne  by  the  party  offering  the 
document(s).    If  required  by  the  Judicial  Commissioner  (at  his/her  discretion),  the  ICC 
shall  make  arrangements  to  have  the  hearing  recorded  or  transcribed.    If  requested  by 
the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel,  the  ICC  shall  also  arrange for  an  interpreter  to 
attend  the  hearing.    Such  costs  of  transcription  and  interpretation  shall  be  paid  by  the 
ICC.   

 
5.2.7  Where  video  evidence  of  the  alleged  offence  is  available  at  the  hearing  before  the 
Judicial  Commissioner,  then  it  may  be  relied  upon  by  any  party,  provided  that  all  other 
parties  shall  have  the  right  to  make  such  representations  in  relation  to  it  that  they  may 
see fit.   

5.2.8  Unless  exceptional  circumstances  apply,  each  of  the  following  individuals  must  attend 
any  hearing  before  the  Judicial  Commissioner:  (a)  the  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel who has been charged with the alleged offence;  and (b) the Complainant (or, 
in the case of the ICC’s Chief Executive Officer, his/her representative/nominee).  Where 
any  such  individual  has  a  compelling  justification  for  his/her  non-attendance,  then  they 
shall  be  given  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  the  hearing  before  the  Judicial 
Commissioner  by  telephone  or  video  conference  (if  available). 
  In  addition,  a 
representative of the ICC’s legal department shall be entitled to attend any such hearing.  
Without  prejudice  to  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  ability  to  call  and  to 
question  such  witnesses  as  may  be  necessary  and/or  to  be  represented  by  such  other 
person of his/her own choosing pursuant to Article 5.2.9, one of the Team Captain, Team 
Vice-Captain or Team Manager of the team that the Player or Player Support Personnel 
represents may also attend such hearing to provide additional support and assistance to 
the Player or Player Support Personnel.   

5.2.9  Each of the individuals described in Article 5.2.8(a) and (b) shall have the right (at his/her 
or its own expense) to be represented at the hearing before the Judicial Commissioner by 
such representative (including  legal  counsel)  of  his/her  or  its  own choosing.   Where  the 
Complainant  is  an  Umpire  or  Match Referee  that  officiated  in  the  International  Match  in 
question  or  the  ICC’s  Chief  Executive  Officer,  then  such  person  shall  be  entitled  to  be 
represented  prior  to,  and  during,  the  hearing  (if  he/she  considers  necessary)  by  a 
representative of the ICC’s Legal Department.   

5.2.10  The non-attendance of the Player or Player Support Personnel or his/her representative 
at the hearing, after proper notice of the hearing has been provided, shall not prevent the 
Judicial  Commissioner  from  proceeding  with the  hearing  in  his/her  absence,  whether  or 
not any written submissions are made on his/her behalf. 

 
5.2.11  At the end of a hearing, where the Judicial Commissioner considers that further evidence 
is necessary or further time is required to consider the evidence that has been presented, 
he/she  shall  adjourn  the  hearing  for  an  appropriate  period  of  time  and  make  such 
directions as may be necessary.   

5.2.12  Alternatively, at the end of a hearing:  

18 

 

 

5.2.12.1  brought under Article 4.6.2:  

(a)  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  (and,  in  any 
event,  no  later  than  forty-eight  (48)  hours  thereafter),  the  Judicial 
Commissioner  will  confirm  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s 
admission  that  he/she  had  committed  a  Code  of  Conduct  offence  and 
announce  his/her  decision  in  writing,  with  reasons,  setting  out:  (a)  what 
sanctions, if any, are to be imposed (including any fine and/or period of 
suspension);  (b)  the  date that  any  period  of  suspension  shall  come into 
force and effect; and (c) any rights  of appeal that may  exist pursuant to 
Article 8. 

 5.2.12.2  brought under Article 4.6.3 (or where the Player or Player Support Personnel 

has failed to respond in a timely fashion to the Notice of Charge):  

(a) 

the  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  adjourn  the  hearing  (for  a  period  of  no 
less  than  ten  (10)  minutes  and  no  more  than  twenty-four  (24)  hours), 
following which he/she will reconvene the hearing and verbally announce 
his/her  finding  as  to  whether  a  Code  of  Conduct  offence  has  been 
committed; 

(b)  where  the  Judicial  Commissioner  determines  that  a  Code  of  Conduct 
offence  has  been  committed,  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel 
may request a short adjournment (of no more than thirty (30) minutes) to 
prepare  any  submissions  that  he/she  might  wish  to  make  in  relation  to 
the appropriate sanction that ought to be applied; and   

(c)  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  (and,  in  any 
event,  no  later  than  forty-eight  (48)  hours  thereafter),  the  Judicial 
Commissioner  will  announce  his/her  decision  in  writing,  with  reasons, 
setting out: (a) the finding as to whether a Code of Conduct offence had 
been committed; (b) what sanctions, if any, are to be imposed (including 
any  fine  and/or  period  of  suspension);  (c)  the  date  that  any  period  of 
suspension shall come into force and effect; and (d) any rights of appeal 
that may exist pursuant to Article 8. 

5.2.13  The  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  have  the  discretion  to  announce  the  substance  of 
his/her  decision  prior  to  the  issue  of  the  written  reasoned  decision  referred  to  in  Article 
5.2.12.    

5.2.14  A copy of the written reasoned decision will be provided to the Player or Player Support 
Personnel,  the  CEO  of  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  National  Cricket 
Federation, the Complainant and the ICC’s Cricket Operations Manager. 

5.2.15  Subject only to the rights of appeal under Article 8, the Judicial Commissioner’s decision 
shall  be  the  full,  final  and  complete  disposition  of  the  matter  and  will  be  binding  on  all 
parties. 

General Principles of Procedure 

5.3 

Where a Report is filed by more than one of the individuals described in Article 3.1 in relation to 
the  same  alleged  offence  under  the  Code  of  Conduct,  then  the  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel alleged to have committed the offence will only be served with one Notice of Charge in 
accordance with the procedures set out in Article 4.  However, all persons who filed a Report (or, 
in the case of the ICC’s Chief Executive Officer, his/her representative/nominee) in relation to the 

19 

 

 

 
5.4 

 
 

 

alleged  offence  are  required  to  attend  the  hearing  before  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial 
Commissioner unless there is a compelling justification for his/her non-attendance, in which case 
they shall be given the opportunity to participate in the hearing by telephone or video conference 
(if available).        

Where two or more Players or Player Support Personnel are alleged to have committed offences 
under  the  Code  of  Conduct,  they  may  both  be  dealt  with  at  the  same  hearing  where  the 
proceedings arise out of the same incident or set of facts, or where there is a clear link between 
separate incidents, as follows: 

5.4.1  any  number  of  Level  1  Offences  and/or  Level  2  Offences  can  all  be  determined  by  a 
 

Match Referee at the same hearing; and 

5.4.2  any  number  of  Level  3  Offences  and/or  Level  4  Offences  can  all  be  determined  by  a 
 

Judicial Commissioner at the same hearing; and 

5.4.3  a Level 1 Offence and/or Level 2 Offence can be determined by a Judicial Commissioner 

at the same hearing as a Level 3 Offence and/or a Level 4 Offence; but 

5.4.3  a  Level  3  Offence  or  Level  4  Offence  cannot  be determined  by  a  Match  Referee  at  the 
same  hearing  as  a  Level  1  Offence  or  a  Level  2  Offence,  and  separate  proceedings 
should therefore be issued in relation to each alleged offence.  

5.5 

Where a Player or Player Support Personnel is alleged to have committed more than one breach 
of  the  Code  of  Conduct  during,  or  in  relation  to  the  same  International  Match,  then  all  of  the 
alleged offences may be dealt with at the same hearing, as follows:  

 

 

5.6 

5.7 

5.5.1  any  number  of  Level  1  Offences  and/or  Level  2  Offences  can  all  be  determined  by  a 
 

Match Referee at the same hearing; and 

5.5.2  any  number  of  Level  3  Offences  and/or  Level  4  Offences  can  all  be  determined  by  a 
 

Judicial Commissioner at the same hearing; and 

5.5.3  a Level 1 Offence and/or Level 2 Offence can be determined by a Judicial Commissioner 

at the same hearing as a Level 3 Offence and/or a Level 4 Offence; but 

5.5.3  a  Level  3 Offence  or  Level  4 Offence  cannot  be determined by  a  Match  Referee  at  the 
same  hearing  as  a  Level  1  Offence  or  a  Level  2  Offence,  and  separate  proceedings 
should therefore be issued in relation to each alleged offence.  

Any failure or refusal by any Player or Player Support Personnel to provide assistance to a Match 
Referee or Judicial Commissioner  in connection with any charge made pursuant to this  Code of 
Conduct may constitute a separate offence (depending upon the seriousness and context of such 
failure or refusal) under Articles 2.1.8, 2.2.12, 2.3.3 or 2.4.3 of the Code of Conduct.     

Where  a  Match Referee  is,  or  becomes  unwilling  or  unable to  hear  a case (for  example,  where 
he/she finds him/herself in a position of conflict), then the  ICC’s General Counsel shall have the 
discretion  to  appoint  the  ICC’s  Chief  Referee  or  such  other  referee  as  the  ICC  deems  to  be 
appropriate  in  all  the  circumstances.   Where  the  ICC’s  Chief  Referee  (or  such  other  referee)  is 
unwilling or unable to hear the case, a member of the ICC’s Code of Conduct Commission (who 
shall  have  had  no  prior  involvement  with  the  case  and  shall  not,  unless  otherwise  agreed 
between  the  parties,  be  from  a  country  participating  in  the  International  Match  during,  or  in 
relation to which, the alleged offence was committed) as a replacement to the Match Referee and 
all of the remaining procedure will apply accordingly     

20 

 

 

5.8 

5.9 

Where a Judicial Commissioner is, or becomes unwilling or unable to hear a case (for example, 
where  he/she  finds  him/herself  in  a  position  of  conflict),  then  the  ICC’s  General  Counsel  shall 
have the discretion to appoint another member of the  ICC’s Code of Conduct Commission (who 
shall  have  had  no  prior  involvement  with  the  case  and  shall  not,  unless  otherwise  agreed 
between  the  parties,  be  from  a  country  participating  in  the  International  Match  during,  or  in 
relation  to  which,  the  alleged  offence  was  committed)  as  a  replacement  to  the  Judicial 
Commissioner and all of the remaining procedure will apply accordingly.   

The  ICC  will  issue  a  public  announcement  regarding  any  decision  of  the  Match  Referee  or 
Judicial  Commissioner  made  under  the  Code  of  Conduct,  as  soon  as  is  reasonably  practicable 
after  the  decision  has  been  communicated  to  the  parties.    The  public  announcement  of  the 
decision  may  include  details  of  the  offences  committed  under  the  Code  of  Conduct  and  of  the 
sanctions imposed, if any.  Until such time as a public announcement is published, all parties and 
participants  in  the  proceedings  shall  treat  such  proceedings  as  strictly  confidential.    For  the 
avoidance of doubt, nothing in this Article shall prevent any party (or any relevant National Cricket 
Federation)  publicly confirming the date of the  hearing, the  offence that  is alleged to have been 
committed and/or the name of the Player or Player Support Personnel charged.  

ARTICLE 6 

STANDARD OF PROOF AND EVIDENCE 

6.1 

6.2 

6.3 

Unless  otherwise  described  herein,  the  standard  of  proof  in  all  cases  brought  under  the  Code  of 
Conduct  shall  be  whether  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  is  comfortably  satisfied, 
bearing  in  mind  the  seriousness  of  the  allegation  that  is  made,  that  the  alleged  offence  has  been 
committed.    This  standard  of  proof  in  all  cases  shall  be  determined  on  a  sliding  scale  from,  at  a 
minimum,  a  mere  balance  of  probability  (for  the  least  serious  offences)  up  to  proof  beyond  a 
reasonable doubt (for the most serious offences).    

The  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  not  be  bound  by  judicial  rules  governing  the 
admissibility of evidence.  Instead, facts relating to an offence committed under the Code of Conduct 
may be established by any reliable means, including admissions.   

The Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner may draw an inference adverse to the Player or Player 
Support Personnel who is asserted to have committed an offence under the Code of Conduct based 
on  his/her  refusal,  without  compelling  justification,  after  a  request  made  in  a  reasonable  time  in 
advance of the hearing, to appear at the hearing (either in person or telephonically as directed by the 
Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner) and/or to answer any relevant questions.   

ARTICLE 7 

SANCTIONS ON PLAYERS AND PLAYER SUPPORT PERSONNEL  

COMMENT:  The  aim  of  the  sanctioning  regime  under  this  Code  of  Conduct  is  to  (a)  sanction  those  Players  and 
Player  Support  Personnel  found  to  have  committed  an  offence  under  the  Code  of  Conduct,  and  (b)  to  act  as  a 
deterrent  to  other  Players  and  Player  Support  Personnel  to  deter  them  from  conducting  themselves  improperly  on 
and off the “field of play”.  The ICC believes that the threat of a suspension is the strongest deterrent to bring about a 
change in behavior.  As such, a system of accumulated Demerit Points, which can lead to suspensions, in addition to 
the standard sanctioning regime, has been introduced into this version of the Code of Conduct.    

7.1 

7.2 

Where a Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner determines that an offence under the Code of 
Conduct has been committed,  he/she  will  be required to impose an appropriate  sanction on the 
Player or Player Support Personnel.   

In determining  the appropriate  sanction,  the  Match Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  take 
into  account  any  factors  that  he/she  deems  relevant  and  appropriate  to  the  mitigation  or 
aggravation of the nature of the Code of Conduct offence before determining, in accordance with 
the table set out in Article 7.3 below, what the appropriate sanction(s) should be.  

21 

 

 

7.3 

 

In addition to sanctions imposed by a Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner under Article 7.2 
above, Demerit Points will be imposed upon a Player or Player Support Personnel found to have 
committed an offence under the Code of Conduct.  The number of Demerit Points imposed will be 
calculated  by  reference  to  the  sanction  imposed  for  the  particular  offences,  as  set  out  in  the 
following table.   

 

 
LEVEL OF 
OFFENCE 

 

RANGE OF PERMISSIBLE SANCTIONS 

CORRESPONDING DEMERIT POINTS 

 

Level 1 

Warning and/or the imposition of a fine of up 
to 50% of the applicable Match Fee. 
 

 

Level 2 

The imposition of a fine of between 50-100% 
of the applicable Match Fee and/or up to two 
(2) Suspension Points.  
 

 

Level 3 

The imposition of between four (4) and eight 
(8) Suspension Points.* 

 

Level 4 

The imposition of eight (8) Suspension Points 
or a suspension for a fixed period of time 
ranging between, at a minimum, the lesser of 
the equivalent of eight (8) Suspension Points 
and one (1) year, up to a maximum of a 
lifetime’s suspension. 
 

See specific sanctions described in the table 
at Article 4 of Appendix 2. 

 

 

Minimum 
Over Rate 
Offences 

 

 

1 

2 
 
3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

Warning or 0-25% 
fine 
 
26-50% fine 

50-100% fine or 1 
Suspension Point 
  
2 Suspension 
Points 
 
4-5 Suspension 
Points 
 
6-8 Suspension 
Points 
 
8 Suspension 
Points 

Fixed period of 
suspension 
between 8 
Suspension Points 
and one (1) year 
 
N/A 

Demerit  Points  will  remain  on  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  disciplinary  record  for  a 
period of twenty-four (24) months from their imposition following which they shall be immediately 
expunged.   

* NOTE: 

In all cases marked with a *, the maximum ‘actual’ period of suspension shall be no more 
than one (1) year, irrespective of the number and/or the practical application of any 
Suspension Points that might be imposed. 

 

7.4 

Where a Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner imposes a period of suspension on any Player 
or Player Support Personnel, then, unless such period is for a fixed period of time (for example, 
one year) then, any such period of suspension shall be referenced by Suspension Points, which 
shall carry the following weightings:  

22 

 

 

 

 

7.5 

 
7.6 

 
 

 
 
7.7 

 
7.8 

 

7.4.1  a Test Match or any other International Match of at least four days in duration is given a 

weighting of two (2) Suspension Points; 

7.4.2  a  One  Day  International  Match  or  Twenty20  International  Match  is  given  a  weighting  of 

one (1) Suspension Point; and  

7.4.3  all other International Matches are given a weighting of one (1) Suspension Point.  

Each time a Player or Player Support Personnel is found to have committed an offence under the 
Code  of  Conduct  and  a  sanction  is  imposed  by  a  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner, 
corresponding Demerit Points as per the table in Article 7.3 above shall be added to the Player or 
Player Support Personnel’s record and accumulated with any existing Demerit Points imposed on 
the  Player or Player  Support Personnel  within the  previous twenty-four (24) months.  The  ICC’s 
Cricket Operations Department will keep an accurate and up-to-date record of all Demerit Points 
imposed  upon  Players  and  Player  Support  Personnel  and  will  carry  out  the  process  of 
accumulating  Demerit  Points  each  time  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  is  found  to  have 
committed an offence and sanctioned.  

Where a Player or Player Support Personnel accumulates a total of four or more Demerit Points 
as set out in the table below, these Demerit Points shall be converted into Suspension Points (at 
the  point  that  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  first  crosses  the  relevant  threshold)  as 
follows: 

Accumulated Demerit Points 

4-7 

8-11 

12 and above 

Corresponding Suspension Points 
 
2 
 
4 
 
6 
 

Notice  of  the  amount  of  Demerit  Points  imposed  and  the  accumulated  total,  together  with  any 
resulting Suspension Points, will be communicated by the ICC’s Cricket Operations Department, 
as soon as is reasonably practicable, to the Player or Player Support Personnel at the same time 
as  notice  is  provided  to  the  CEO  of  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  National  Cricket 
Federation  of  the  commission  of  the  offence  and  resulting  sanction.    Any  resulting  Suspension 
Points imposed on the basis of accumulated Demerit Points shall be applied in accordance with 
the principles set down in Article 7.9 below and shall take effect immediately  upon notice of the 
same to the Player or Player Support Personnel. 

Any  Suspension  Points  imposed  on  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  through  the 
accumulation of Demerit Points will be applicable in addition to, and, for the avoidance of doubt, 
not in place of, any Suspension Points or period of suspension imposed by the Match Referee or 
Judicial  Commissioner  pursuant  to  Article  7.2  above.  However,  any  such  period  of  suspension 
shall  run  concurrently  with  any  period  of  suspension  imposed  by  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial 
Commissioner. 

EXAMPLE OF THE APPLICATION OF DEMERIT POINTS: 
 
1.  A Player commits a Level 1 offence and receives a fine of 50% from the Match Referee. 

23 

 

 

 

7.9 

2.  That  Player  will  correspondingly  receive  two  (2)  Demerit  Points  in  respect  of  that  offence  on  his/her 

disciplinary record. 

3.  The  same  Player  then  commits  a  Level  2  offence  three  (3)  months  after  the  Level  1  offence  was 

committed and is sanctioned with 2 Suspension Points by the Match Referee. 

4.  The Level 2 offence will equate to four (4) Demerit Points. 

5.  As  the  second  offence  took  place  within  three  (3)  months  of  the  first  offence,  the  Demerit  Points 
imposed in respect of the second offence are added to the Demerit Points imposed in respect of the first 
offence, meaning that the Player now has an accumulated total of six (6) Demerit Points. 

6.  Six  (6)  Demerit  Points  equate  to  a  suspension  equivalent  to  two  (2)  Suspension  Points  (i.e.  1  Test 
Match  or  2  ODIs  or  2  T20Is.    Such  suspension  will  be  served  by  the  Player  concurrently  with  the 
suspension imposed in respect of the Level 2 offence. 

7.  After completing his/her suspension, the Demerit Points remain on the Player’s disciplinary record for a 

period of twenty-four (24) months. 

8.  Three (3) months later, the Player commits another Level 2 offence and is sanctioned for that offence 

with a 100% fine. 

9.  A further three (3) Demerit Points will then be added to the Player’s disciplinary record in respect of that 

offence, taking his/her accumulated total within twenty-four (24) months to nine (9) Demerit Points. 

10.  Nine  (9)  Demerit  Points  equate  to  a  suspension  equivalent  to  four  (4)  Suspension  Points  (i.e.  2  Test 
Matches, 1 Test Match and 2 ODIs/T20Is or 4 ODIs or 4 T20Is).  Such suspension will be served by the 
Player immediately upon notice of the same in accordance with Article 7.7.  

11.  After completing his/her suspension, the Demerit Points remain on the Player’s disciplinary record for a 

period of twenty-four (24) months. 

Where Suspension Points are imposed against a Player or Player Support Personnel (whether by 
a  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner,  or  through  the  accumulation  of  Demerit  Points  in 
accordance  with  Article  7.6  above),  then  such  Suspension  Points  will  be  applied  in  accordance 
with the following principles:   

7.9.1 

the Match Referee, Judicial Commissioner or the ICC (as applicable) shall have regard to 
the  Player’s  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  participation  in  the  various  formats  of 
International  Matches  over  the  previous  two  years  in  order  to  determine  (to  the  best  of 
his/her ability) which of the forthcoming International Matches the Player is most likely to 
participate in or the Player Support Personnel is most likely to assist the participation of a 
Player in;   

7.9.2  where necessary, the Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner shall be entitled to consult 
with the ICC in order to make a determination as to which of the forthcoming International 
Matches the Player is most likely to participate in or the Player Support Personnel is most 
likely to assist the participation of a Player in;  

7.9.3 

in so far as is reasonably possible, the Match Referee, Judicial Commissioner or the ICC 
(as  applicable)  shall  apply  the  Suspension  Points  to  the  subsequent  International 
Matches  in  which  the  Player  is  most  likely  to  participate  in  or  the  Player  Support 
Personnel is most likely to assist the participation of a Player in, on a chronological basis 
immediately following the announcement of the decision;  

24 

 

 

 

7.9.4  where a Player or Player Support Personnel has his/her Suspension Points applied to an 
International  Match  that  is  subsequently  cancelled,  postponed  or  otherwise  abandoned 
prior  to  the  actual  day  on  which  it  is  scheduled  to  take  place,  then  such  Suspension 
Points  must  be  reallocated  to  the  next  subsequent  International  Matches  in  which  the 
Player  is  most  likely  to  participate  in  or  the  Player  Support  Personnel  is  most  likely  to 
assist  the  participation  of  a  Player  in.    Where  an  International  Match  is  cancelled, 
postponed or otherwise abandoned at any time on the actual day on which it is scheduled 
to  take  place,  then  the  Suspension  Points  will  remain  allocated  to  that  International 
Match, irrespective of such cancellation, postponement or abandonment.    

EXAMPLES OF THE APPLICATION OF SUSPENSION POINTS: 
 
1. 

Where  a  Player’s  playing  history  suggests  that  he/she  is  most  likely  to  represent  his/her  National 
Cricket  Federation  in  Test  Matches  only,  then  the  Suspension  Points  shall  be  applied  to  his/her 
future participation in Test Matches only, so that six (6) Suspension Points would be applied to the 
three  (3)  Test  Matches  immediately  following  the  announcement  of  the  decision,  notwithstanding 
that  the  National  Cricket  Federation  might  be  participating  in  intervening  One  Day  International 
Matches and/or Twenty20 International Matches. 

Where  a  Player’s  playing history suggests  that  he/she  is  likely  to  be  selected  to  represent  his/her 
National  Cricket  Federation  in  all  formats  of  International  Matches,  then  the  Suspension  Points 
shall be applied to his/her future participation in all International Matches in the sequential order in 
which  such  International  Matches  take  place  immediately  following  the  announcement  of  the 
decision.    The  examples  set out  below,  would  apply  to the  following chronological list  of  potential 
playing fixtures: 

Code of Conduct decision  
One-Day International Match - weighting 1 Suspension Point (“Match A”) 
One-Day International Match - weighting 1 Suspension Point (“Match B”) 
Test Match - weighting 2 Suspension Point (“Match C”) 
Test Match weighting 2 Suspension Point (“Match D”) 
Twenty20 International Match - weighting 1 Suspension Point (“Match E”) 
Twenty20 International Match - weighting 1 Suspension Point (“Match F”) 

One (1) Suspension Point would be applied to Match A; 
Two (2) Suspension Points would be applied to Matches A and B; 
Three (3) Suspension Points would be applied to Matches A, B and E; 
Four (4) Suspension Point would be applied to Match A, B and C; 
Five (5) Suspension Points would be applied to Matches A, B, C and E; 
Six (6) Suspension Points would be applied to Matches A, B, C and D; 
Seven (7) Suspension Points would be applied to Matches A, B, C, D and E; 
Eight (8) Suspension Points would be applied to Matches A, B, C, D, E and F. 

2. 

- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 

 
 

7.10 

For the avoidance of any doubt: 

   

7.10.1  the Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner will have no jurisdiction to adjust, reverse or 
 

amend the results of any International Match;  

7.10.2  where  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  is  found  guilty  of  committing  two  separate 
Code of Conduct offences that do not relate to the same incident or set of circumstances 
arising  during  an  International  Match  and  sanctioned  separately  for  each  offence,  then 
any sanctions should run cumulatively (and not concurrently);  

7.10.3  where  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  is  found  guilty  of  committing  two  Code  of 
Conduct offences in relation to the same incident or set of circumstances  arising during 

25 

 

 

an  International  Match  and  sanctioned  separately,  then  any  sanctions  imposed  should 
run concurrently (and not cumulatively);  

7.10.4  nothing  in  this  Code  of  Conduct  shall  permit  plea  bargaining  in  relation  to  any  alleged 

offence committed under this Code of Conduct;  

7.10.5  where  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  finds  a  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel not guilty of the offence allegedly committed under the Code of Conduct, then 
it  remains  open  to  him/her,  at  his/her  discretion,  to  find  the  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel  guilty  of  an  offence  of  a  lower  level  than  that  with  which  he/she  has  been 
charged.    For  example  where  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  has  been  charged 
with (but been found not guilty of) the Level 2 Offence of ‘showing serious dissent at an 
Umpire’s  decision’  (Article  2.2.1),  the  Match  Referee  may,  instead,  find  the  Player  or 
Player Support Personnel guilty of the Level 1 Offence of ‘showing dissent at an Umpire’s 
decision’ (Article 2.1.3) and impose an appropriate sanction; and  

7.10.6  where  a  fine  and/or  costs  award  is  imposed  against  a  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel,  then such fine  and/or  costs  award  must  be  paid: (a)  by  the  Player  or  Player 
Support  Personnel  (and  not  any  other  third  party,  including  a  National  Cricket 
Federation); (b) to the Player or Player Support  Personnel’s National Cricket Federation 
(for onward transmission to the ICC) within one calendar month of receipt of the decision 
imposing the fine.  However, the ICC will consider any request from any Player or Player 
Support  Personnel  to  make  the  payment  of  such  fines  and/or  costs  over  a  prolonged 
period of time on the grounds of financial hardship.  Should any fine and/or costs award 
(or  agreed  part-payment  or  instalment  thereof)  not  be  paid  to  the  relevant  National 
Cricket Federation within such deadline or by the time of the next agreed payment date, 
the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  may  not  play,  coach  or  otherwise participate  or 
be  involved  in  any  capacity  in  any  International  Match  until  such  payment  has  been 
satisfied in full.  

7.11  Where  a  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  has  had  Suspension  Points  imposed  against 
him/her  or  has  been  suspended  for  a  fixed  period  of  time,  he/she  may  not  play,  coach  or 
otherwise participate or be involved in any capacity in the International Match(es) which: (a) are 
covered by the application of his/her Suspension Points as determined in accordance with Article 
7.9; or (b) take place during the fixed period of his/her suspension.   

NOTE:  For  the  avoidance  of  any  doubt,  a  Player  or  (where  relevant)  Player  Support  Personnel  who  has 
had Suspension Points imposed against him/her or has been suspended for a fixed period of time shall not, 
during  the  International  Matches  which  are  covered  by  his/her  Suspension  Points  or  the  period  of 
suspension: 

(a) 

be nominated as, or carry out any of the duties or responsibilities of, a substitute fielder; or 

(b) 
enter any part of the playing area (which shall include, for the avoidance of doubt, the field of play 
and  the  area between  the  boundary  and  perimeter  boards)  at  any  time,  including during any scheduled  or 
unscheduled breaks in play. 

In  addition,  Player  Support  Personnel  so  sanctioned  shall  not  be  permitted  to  enter  the  players’  dressing 
room (including the viewing areas) during any International Match  covered by his/her Suspension Points or 
the period of suspension.  Players so sanctioned will, however, be permitted to enter the players’ dressing 
room provided that the players’ dressing room (or any part thereof) for the relevant International Match is not 
within the player area described in (b) above (for example, no such Player shall be permitted access to an 
on-field ‘dug-out’). 

Finally,  any  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  so  sanctioned  shall  not  be  prevented  from  attending  any 
post-match  ceremonies  or  presentations  taking  place  anywhere  on  the  field  of  play  or  otherwise  following 

26 

 

 

the conclusion of an International Match covered by his/her Suspension Points or the period of suspension 
unless the suspension or Suspension Points have been imposed in respect of a Level 3 or Level 4 Offence 
under  this  Code  of  Conduct.    In  such  circumstances,  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  shall  not  be 
permitted to attend such ceremonies or presentations. 

7.12  Once  any  Suspension  Points  or  fixed  period  of  suspension  has  expired,  the  Player  or  Player 
Support Personnel will automatically become re-eligible to participate (in the case of a Player) or 
assist  the  participation  (in  the  case  of  a  Player  Support  Personnel)  in  International  Matches 
provided that he/she has paid, in full, all amounts forfeited under the Code of Conduct, including 
any fines, compensatory awards or award of costs that may have been imposed against him/her.    

ARTICLE 8 

APPEALS 

NOTE: For the avoidance of doubt, the right of appeal will be determined by reference to the Level of 
offence which the decision of the Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner (as applicable) relates to, and not 
necessarily the Level of offence originally reported.   
 
By way of example, a Judicial Commissioner may have been asked to determine a Level 3 Offence, but in 
coming to his/her decision, he/she has exercised the right afforded to him/her in Article 7.10.5 and found the 
Player or Player Support Personnel concerned not guilty of the Level 3 Offence, but guilty of a Level 2 
Offence.  In such circumstances, the right of appeal shall be determined on the basis of the Level 2 Offence 
and thus in accordance with Article 8.2.   
 
In circumstances where the application of this note would lead to the same level of adjudicator hearing the 
appeal as heard the first instance case, then the relevant adjudicatory body shall be the higher body.  By 
way of example, in the example listed above, an Appeal Panel would have the jurisdiction to hear the appeal 
against the Level 2 Offence even though technically under the Code of Conduct a Judicial Commissioner 
would hear the appeal, as the first instance hearing was held before a Judicial Commissioner.  The terms of 
this Article 8 should therefore be construed accordingly. 

8.1 

Appeals from decisions in relation to a first Level 1 Offence 

8.1.1  Decisions made under the Code of Conduct by a Match Referee in relation to a first Level 1 
Offence shall be non-appealable and shall remain the full and final decision  in  relation  to  the 
 
 
matter.   

NOTE: For the avoidance of doubt, a Level 1 Offence will not be considered to be a first Level 1 Offence 
where the Player or Player Support Personnel concerned has previously been found guilty of the same 
Article under the Code of Conduct within a period of twelve months prior to the date on which the alleged 
offence took place. 

 

 

8.2 

Appeals from decisions in relation to: (a) a second, third or fourth Level 1 Offence; (b) a Level 
2 Offence; or (c) a Minimum Over Rate Offence 

8.2.1  Decisions made under the Code of Conduct by a   Match  Referee 

to:  (a)  a 
second,  third  or fourth  Level  1  Offence  within  the  applicable  twelve  month  period;  or  (b) a 
Level 2 Offence; or (c) a Minimum Over Rate Offence, may be challenged solely by appeal 
as set out in this Article 8.2.  Such decision shall remain in effect while under appeal unless 
any Judicial Commissioner properly convened to hear the appeal orders otherwise.   

in  relation 

8.2.2  The only parties who may appeal a decision of this nature shall be: (a) the Player or Player 
Support Personnel found guilty of the offence or, where appropriate in the case of an offence 
under  either  Article  2.2.9  (changing  the  condition  of  the  ball),  2.2.13  (manipulation  of  an 
International  Match),  or  2.5.1/2.5.2  (failure  to  meet  the  Minimum  Over  Rate),  the  relevant 

27 

 

 

Team  Captain;  (b)  the  person  who  lodged  the  Report  pursuant  to  Article  3,1;  and  (c)  the 
ICC’s Chief Executive Officer (or his/her designee). 

8.2.3  Any notice to appeal under this Article must be lodged with the ICC’s General Counsel within 
48 hours of receipt of the written decision of the Match Referee.  In all cases, a copy of such 
notice  will  also  be  provided  to  the  CEO  of  the  National  Cricket  Federation  to  which  the 
Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  is  affiliated  and  the  person  who  lodged  the  Report 
pursuant to Article 3.1.  Thereafter, the following will apply: 

8.2.3.1  Within 48 hours of receipt of a notice to appeal: (a) the ICC’s General Counsel will 
appoint  a  member  of  the  ICC’s  Code  of  Conduct  Commission  who  is  (unless 
otherwise  agreed  between  the  parties)  from  a  country  other  than  those 
participating in the International Match during, or in relation to which, the alleged 
offence  was  committed,  to  act  as  Judicial  Commissioner  and  hear  the  appeal 
sitting  alone;  and  (b)  the  Match  Referee  will  provide  a  written  statement  to  the 
ICC’s General Counsel setting our any relevant facts (to be copied to the Player 
or Player Support Personnel). 

8.2.3.2 

8.2.3.3 

The  provisions  of  Articles  5.1.2  to  5.1.11,  applicable  to  proceedings  before  the 
Match  Referee,  shall  apply  mutatis  mutandis  (ie  with  changes  deemed  to  have 
been made as required to reflect the different context) to appeal hearings before 
the Judicial Commissioner.  

The Judicial  Commissioner shall  hear  and  determine  all  issues  arising  from any 
matter  which  is  appealed  pursuant  to  this  Article  on  a  de  novo  basis,  ie  he/she 
shall hear the matter over again, from the beginning, without being bound in any 
way  by  the  decision  being  appealed.    For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  Judicial 
Commissioner shall have the power to increase or decrease, amend or otherwise 
substitute  a  new  decision  on  the  appropriateness  (or  otherwise)  of  the  sanction 
imposed  at  first  instance,  provided  that  any  new  sanction  must  be  within  the 
permitted  range  of  sanctions  set  out  in  the  table  in  Article  7.3  (or,  where 
applicable, Article 4 of Appendix 2).       

8.2.3.4  Appeal  hearings  pursuant  to  this  Article  8.2  should  be  completed  expeditiously.  
Save  where  all  parties  agree  or  fairness  requires  otherwise,  the  appeal  hearing 
shall  be  commenced  no  later  than  seven  (7)  days  after  the  appointment  of  the 
member of the Judicial Commissioner.  

8.2.3.5 

The Judicial Commissioner shall have the power to order some or all of the costs 
of  the  appeal  proceedings  (including  the  costs  of  holding  the  hearing,  any 
interpretation  costs,  the  legal  and/or  travel/accommodation  costs  of  the  Judicial 
Commissioner and/or any other relevant parties) to be paid by the appealing party 
if he/she considers that such party has acted spuriously, frivolously or otherwise in 
bad faith.       

8.2.3.6  Any decision made by the  Judicial Commissioner under this Article 8.2, shall be 
the  full,  final  and  complete  disposition  of  the  matter  and  will  be  binding  on  all 
parties.  

8.3 

Appeals from decisions in relation to a Level 3 Offence or Level 4 Offence  

8.3.1  Decisions  made  under  the  Code  of  Conduct  by  a  Judicial  Commissioner  in  relation  to  a 
Level  3  Offence  or  Level  4 Offence may  be  challenged solely  by  appeal  as  set  out  in  this 
Article  8.3.    Such  decision  shall  remain  in  effect  while  under  appeal  unless  any  properly 
convened Appeal Panel orders otherwise.    

28 

 

 

8.3.2  The only parties who may appeal a decision made in relation to a Level 3 Offence or Level 4 
Offence shall be: (a) the Player or Player Support Personnel found guilty of the offence; (b) 
the person who lodged the Report pursuant to Article 3.1; and (b) the ICC’s Chief Executive 
Officer.   

8.3.3  Any notice to appeal under this Article must be lodged with the ICC’s General Counsel within 
seven (7) days of receipt of the written decision of the Judicial Commissioner.  In all cases, a 
copy of such notice will also be provided to the CEO  of the  National Cricket Federation to 
which  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  is  affiliated.    Thereafter,  the  following  will 
apply: 

8.3.3.1  Within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of a notice to appeal: (a) the ICC’s General 
Counsel  will  appoint  three  members  of  the  ICC’s  Code  of  Conduct  Commission 
each of whom are (unless otherwise agreed between the parties) from a country 
other  than  those  participating  in  the  relevant  International  Match  to  sit  as  the 
Appeal Panel to hear the appeal; and (b) the Judicial Commissioner will provide a 
written statement to the ICC’s General Counsel setting our any relevant facts (to 
be copied to the Player or Player Support Personnel).  

8.3.3.2 

The  provisions  of  Articles  5.2.2  to  5.2.14,  applicable  to  proceedings  before  the 
Judicial Commissioner, shall apply mutatis mutandis (ie with changes deemed to 
have  been  made  as  required  to  reflect  the  different  context)  to  appeal  hearings 
before the Appeal Panel.  

8.3.3.3  Where required in order to do justice (for example to cure procedural errors at the 
first instance hearing), the appeal shall take the form of a re-hearing de novo of 
the  issues  raised  by  the  case.    In  all  other  cases,  the  appeal  shall  not  take  the 
form  of  a  de  novo  hearing  but  instead  shall  be  limited  to  a  consideration  of 
whether the decision being appealed was erroneous.     

8.3.3.4  Appeal  hearings  pursuant  to  this  Article  8.3  should  be  completed  expeditiously.  
Save  where  all  parties  agree  or  fairness  requires  otherwise,  the  appeal  hearing 
shall  be  commenced  no  later  than  thirty  (30)  days  after  the  appointment  of  the 
Appeal Panel.  It shall be open to the Appeal Panel, in its discretion, to determine 
that the matter (or any part thereof) be dealt with by  way  of written submissions 
only. 

8.3.3.5 

The  Appeal  Panel  shall  have  the  power  to  order  some  or  all  of  the  costs  of  the 
appeal proceedings (including the costs of holding the hearing, any interpretation 
costs,  the  legal  and/or  travel/accommodation  costs  of  the  Appeal  Panel  and/or 
any  other  relevant  parties)  to  be  paid  by  the  appealing  party  if  it  considers  that 
such party has acted, spuriously, frivolously or otherwise in bad faith.      

8.3.3.6  Any  decision  made  by  the  Appeal  Panel  under  this  Article  8.3,  shall  be  the  full, 

final and complete disposition of the matter and will be binding on all parties.  

8.4 

No appeal in relation to an accepted sanction  

8.4.1  For the avoidance of doubt, where a Player or Player Support Personnel admits the offence 
charged  and  accedes  to  the  proposed  sanction  specified  in  the  Notice  of  Charge  in 
accordance  with  the  procedure  described  in  Articles  4.2.1  or  4.6.1,  the  Player  or  Player 
Support  Personnel  waives  his/her  right  to  any  appeal  against  the  imposition  of  such  a 
sanction.   

29 

 

 

ARTICLE 9 

RECOGNITION OF DECISIONS  

9.1 

Any  hearing  results  or  other  final  adjudications  under  the  Code  of  Conduct  shall  be  recognised 
and  respected  by  the  ICC  and  its  National  Cricket  Federations  automatically  upon  receipt  of 
notice of the same, without the  need for any further formality.   Each of the ICC  and its  National 
Cricket  Federations  shall  take  all  steps  legally  available  to  it  to  enforce  and  give  effect  to  such 
decisions.  

9.2 

It shall be a condition of membership of the ICC that all National Cricket Federations shall comply 
with the Code of Conduct.   

ARTICLE 10  AMENDMENT AND INTERPRETATION OF THE CODE OF CONDUCT 

10.1 

The Code of Conduct may  be amended from time  to time by the Executive Board of the ICC, with 
such amendments coming into effect on the date specified by the ICC.   

10.2 

10.3 

10.4 

10.5 

The headings used for the various Articles of the Code of Conduct are for the purpose of guidance 
only  and  shall  not  be  deemed  to  be  part  of  the  substance  of  the  Code  of  Conduct  or  to  inform  or 
affect in any way the language of the provisions to which they refer. 

The  Code  of  Conduct  shall  come  into  full  force  and  effect  on  28  September  2017  (the  “Effective 
Date”).    It  shall  not  apply  retrospectively  to  matters  pending  before  the  Effective  Date;  provided, 
however,  that  any  case  pending  prior  to  the  Effective  Date,  or  brought  after  the  Effective  Date  but 
based on an offence that is alleged to have occurred before the Effective Date, shall be governed by 
the predecessor version of the Code of Conduct in force at the time of the alleged offence, subject to 
any application of the principle of lex mitior by the hearing panel determining the case. 

If  any  Article  or  provision  of  this  Code  of  Conduct  is  held  invalid,  unenforceable  or  illegal  for  any 
reason, the Code of Conduct shall remain otherwise in full force apart from such Article or provision 
which shall be deemed deleted insofar as it is invalid, unenforceable or illegal.   

The Code of Conduct is governed by and shall be construed in accordance with English law.  Strictly 
without  prejudice  to  the  arbitration  provisions  of  Articles  5  and  8  of  the  Code  of  Conduct,  disputes 
relating to the Code of Conduct shall be subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the English courts. 

30 

 

 

APPENDIX 1 - DEFINITIONS 

 
Affiliate Member.  Any National Cricket Federation with affiliate member status of the ICC. 
 
Appeal  Panel.    A  panel  of  three  persons  appointed  by  the  ICC  from  the  members  of  the  ICC  Code  of 
Conduct Commission to perform the functions assigned to the Appeal Panel under the Code of Conduct.  
Each  member  of  the  Appeal  Panel  shall  be  independent  of  the  ICC,  which  may  provide  reasonable 
compensation and reimbursement of expenses to such members. 
 
Associate Member.  Any National Cricket Federation with associate member status of the ICC. 
 
Complainant.  As defined in Article 5.2.2. 
 
Demerit Points.  Points which are accrued by a Player or Player Support Personnel pursuant to Article 7 
each time he/she commits an offence under the Code of Conduct.  
 
Effective Date.  As defined in Article 10.3. 
 
Full Member.  Any National Cricket Federation with full member status of the ICC. 
 
ICC.  The International Cricket Council or its designee.   
 
ICC’s  Chief  Executive  Officer.    The  person  appointed  by  the  ICC  from  time  to  time  to  act  as  the  ICC’s 
Chief Executive Officer (or his/her designee). 
 
ICC’s  Chief  Referee.    The  person  appointed  by  the  ICC  from  time  to  time  to  act  as  the  ICC’s  Chief 
Referee (or his/her designee). 
 
ICC Classification of Official Cricket.  The ICC Classification of Official Cricket, in force from time to time. 
 
ICC’s  Clothing  and  Equipment  Regulations.    The  ICC’s  Clothing  and  Equipment  Regulations,  in  force 
from time to time. 
 
ICC Code of Conduct Commission.  An official committee of the ICC established, amongst other things, to 
enquire into conduct which is prejudicial to the interests of the game of cricket. Each member of the ICC 
Code  of  Conduct  Commission  shall  be  independent  of  the  ICC,  which  may  provide  reasonable 
compensation and reimbursement of expenses to such members.   
 
ICC Code of Conduct for Umpires and Referees. The ICC’s Code of Conduct for Umpires and Referees, 
in force from time to time. 
 
ICC Events.  Each of the following: (a) the ICC Cricket World Cup; (b) the ICC  World Twenty20; (c) the 
ICC  Champions  Trophy;  (d)  the  ICC World  Cricket  League  Championship  and  Divisions  2-5  (inclusive), 
together with any regional qualifying events thereto; (e) the ICC Women’s World Cup; (f) the ICC Under 
19  Cricket World Cup;  (g)  the  ICC World  Cup Qualifying  Tournament; (h)  the  ICC Women’s World  Cup 
Qualifying Tournament, together with any regional qualifying events thereto; (i) the ICC World Twenty20 
Qualifying Tournament; (j) the ICC Under 19 Cricket World Cup Qualifying Tournament, together with any 
regional qualifying events thereto; (k) the ICC Intercontinental Cup; and (l) any other event organised or 
sanctioned by the ICC from time to time to which the ICC deems it appropriate that the Code of Conduct 
should apply.   
 
ICC’s General Counsel.  The person appointed by the ICC from time to time to act as the ICC’s General 
Counsel (or his/her designee). 
 

31 

 

 

ICC Standard Test Match,  ODI and T20I Playing Conditions.  Each of the ICC’s Men’s and Women’s Test 
Match, One Day International and Twenty20 International Playing Conditions, in force from time to time. 

International  Match.  Each  of  the  following  (in  men’s  and  women’s  cricket):  (a)  any  Test  Match,  One  Day 
International Match or Twenty20 International Match; (b) any Match played as part of an ICC Event; (c) any 
Match played between representative sides of any National Cricket Federation at Under 19 level or above; (d) 
any International Tour Match; or (e) any other Match organised or sanctioned by the ICC from time to time to 
which the ICC deems it appropriate that the Code of Conduct should apply. 

International Tour Match.  Any Match played between a representative team of a Full Member (or Associate 
Member with Test and/or ODI or T20I Status) and any domestic, guest or invitational team.       

Judicial  Commissioner.  The  independent  person  appointed  by  the  ICC  from  the  ICC  Code  of  Conduct 
Commission, to perform the functions assigned to the Judicial Commissioner under the Code of Conduct.   
 
Level 1 Offence.  Any of the offences described in Articles 2.1.1 – 2.1.8. 
 
Level 2 Offence.  Any of the offences described in Articles 2.2.1 – 2.2.11. 
 
Level 3 Offence.  Any of the offences described in Articles 2.3.1 – 2.3.3. 
 
Level 4 Offence.  Any of the offences described in Articles 2.4.1 – 2.4.5. 
 
Match.  A cricket match of any format and duration in length played between representative teams (male 
or female) of two National Cricket Federations affiliated to the ICC.   
 
Match Fee.  The  designated  match  fee  (which  is  to  be used  for  the  purposes  of  calculating  sanctions  in 
accordance with Article 7) as set out in Appendix 3 of this Code of Conduct. 
 
Match Referee.  The independent person appointed by the ICC (or any other relevant party) as the official 
match  referee  for  a  designated  International  Match,  whether  such  Match  Referee  carries  out  his/her 
functions remotely or otherwise.  Where a Match Referee is not physically present at a particular  Match, 
he/she may be assisted in the administrative performance of his/her duties under this Code of Conduct by 
any official ‘Match Manager’ who may be appointed to officiate at such International Match.        
 
Minimum Over Rate.  As defined in Appendix 2 of this Code of Conduct. 
 
Minimum Over Rate Offence. Any of the offences described in Articles 2.5.1 – 2.5.2. 
 
Minor Over Rate Offence.  As defined in Article 2.5.1.  
 
National  Cricket Federation.    A  national  or  regional  entity  which is  a member  of or  is  recognised  by  the 
ICC as the entity governing the sport of cricket in a country (or collective group of countries associated for 
cricket purposes).  
 
Notice of Charge.  As defined in Article 4.1 and/or Article 4.5. 
 
One Day International Match.  As defined in the ICC Classification of Official Cricket.  
 
Player. Any cricketer who is selected in any playing or touring team or squad that is chosen to represent a 
National Cricket Federation in any International Match or series of International Matches. 
  
Player Support Personnel.  Any coach, trainer, manager, selector, team official, doctor, physiotherapist or 
any other person employed by, representing or otherwise affiliated to a playing/touring team or squad that 

32 

 

 

is chosen to represent a National Cricket Federation in any International Match or series of International 
Matches.    
 
Report.  As defined in Article 3.1. 
 
Serious Over Rate Offence.  As defined in Article 2.5.2.   
 
Suspension  Points.    The  weighting  points  used  to  determine  the  period  of  suspension  imposed  against 
any Player or Player Support Personnel pursuant to Article 7 of the Code of Conduct.     
 
Team Captain or Vice Captain.  The official captain or vice captain of any team participating in a Match. 
 
Team Manager. The official manager of any team participating in a Match. 
 
Test Match.  As defined in the ICC Classification of Official Cricket. 
 
Twenty20 International Match.  As defined in the ICC Classification of Official Cricket. 
 
Umpire. Any umpire (including any third or other umpires) appointed to officiate in a Match.  
 

33 

 

 

 

REQUIREMENTS, CALCULATION, REPORTING AND DISCIPLINARY 

APPENDIX 2 – MINIMUM OVER RATE  

PROCESS AND SANCTIONS 

 
1. 
 
 

 
2. 
 
2.1 

 
2.2 

 

 

 

 

 

 
2.3 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
2.4 
 

Minimum Over Rate 

The minimum over rate to be achieved by the fielding team in  all International  Matches  shall be 
as  set  out  in  the  ICC  Standard  Test  Match,  ODI  and  T20I  Playing  Conditions  applicable  to  the 
relevant International Match (the “Minimum Over Rate”).   

Calculating the Actual Over Rate 

The actual  over rate  will  be calculated at the end of  each International  Match by  those Umpires 
appointed  to  officiate  in  such  International  Match.    In  the  case  of  Test  Matches  (or  other 
International  Matches  of  at  least  four  days  in  duration),  the  actual  over  rate  will  be  the  average 
rate which is achieved by the fielding team across both of the batting team’s innings.   

In  calculating  the  actual  over  rate  for  an  International  Match,  allowances  will  be  given  for  the 
actual time lost as a result of any of the following: 

2.2.1 

treatment given to a Player by an authorised medical personnel on the field of play; 

2.2.2  a Player being required to leave the field as a result of a serious injury; 

2.2.3  all third Umpire referrals and consultations;  

2.2.4 
 
 

time  wasting  by  the  batting  side  (which  may,  in  addition,  constitute  a  separate  offence 
pursuant to any of Articles  2.1.8, 2.2.11, 2.3.3  or 2.4.4 depending upon the context and 
seriousness of the incident); and  

2.2.5  all other circumstance that are beyond the control of the fielding team. 

In addition, the following time allowances will only be given in: 

2.3.1  Test Matches (or other International Matches of at least four days in duration): 
 

(a) 

(b) 
 

2 minutes per  wicket taken, provided that such wicket results in the subsequent 
batsmen  immediately  commencing  his/her  innings.    For  the  avoidance  of  any 
doubt, no time allowance will be given for the final wicket of an innings or where 
a wicket falls immediately prior to any interval; and 

4 minutes per drinks break taken (one per session).    

2.3.2  Twenty20 International Matches: 
 

(a) 

1  minute  for  every  3  full  overs  that  an  innings  is  reduced  by  as  a  result  of  any 
delay and/or interruption in play. 

Further, where the batting team:  

2.4.1 

in a Test Match (or other International Match of at least four days in duration)  is bowled 
out  in  3½  hours  or  less  (taking  into account  all  of  the  time  allowances  described  in this 

34 

 

 

 

 
3. 
 
3.1 

 
3.2 

 

 

 
4. 
 
4.1 
 

Article 2) in any particular innings, no account shall be taken of the actual over rate in that 
innings when calculating the actual over rate at the end of such Match.   

2.4.2 

in  an  One  Day  International  Match  is  bowled  out  within  the  time  determined  for  that 
innings  pursuant  to  the  ICC’s  Standard  ODI  Playing  Conditions,  no  sanction  may  be 
imposed in respect of a breach of the Minimum Over Rate.  

Procedure  

Where  the  actual  over  rate  is  calculated  by  the  Umpires  as  being  equal  to  or  in  excess  of  the 
Minimum Over Rate, no further action shall be taken. 

Where  the  actual  over  rate  is  calculated  by  the  Umpires  as  being  less  than  the  Minimum  Over 
Rate, the following shall apply:   

3.2.1  only  the  Umpires  that  officiated  in  the  International  Match  during  which  the  alleged 
offence  was  committed  can  report  such  an  offence  to  the  Match  Referee,  and  such 
Report,  which  must  be  completed  on  Form  “Rep  1”  must  be  lodged  with  the  Match 
Referee  (or,  where,  for  logistical  reasons,  it  is  impractical  to  lodge  with  the  Match 
Referee,  the  ICC’s  Cricket  Operations  Department)  within  18  hours  of  the  close  of  the 
day’s  play  in  the  relevant  International  Match  or  prior  to  the  start  of  the  following  day’s 
play, whichever is the sooner;   

3.2.2 

thereafter,  the  Match  Referee  shall  promptly  consult  with  the  Umpires  and  shall  be 
entitled,  after  such  consultation,  to  make  such  amendments  to  the  actual  over  rate 
calculation  as  he/she  deems  appropriate 
in  the  circumstances  to  reflect  those 
circumstances that are beyond the control of the fielding team (including, but not limited 
to those set out in Article 2 of this Appendix 2).  

 
3.2.3  where  the  Match Referee  confirms  that  the  Minimum  Over  Rate  has  not  been achieved 
by the fielding side in any International Match, this shall constitute an offence under either 
Article 2.5.1 or 2.5.2 of the Code of Conduct and the Match Referee will promptly issue a 
Notice of Charge  in accordance  with Article 4.1  of  the  Code  of Conduct  (with the  Team 
Captain being charged on behalf of the Players in the fielding side as well as him/herself) 
and the matter will be thereafter be adjudicated by the Match Referee in accordance with 
the procedure set out in Article 5. 

Applicable Sanctions for a Minimum Over Rate Offence 

The principles set out in Article 7 (regarding sanctions) shall be applied in full except that: 

4.1.1 

in order to determine the sanction that is to be imposed in each case, the Match Referee 
must  first  consider  whether  the  Player  has  previously  been  found  guilty  of  the  same 
offence  under  the  Code  of  Conduct  (or  any  predecessor  regulations  that  may  have 
applied) in the same format of the game within a period of twelve months prior to the date 
on which the alleged offence took place.      

 
4.1.2  once  the  Match  Referee  has  established  whether  or  not  this  is  a  repeat  offence  in  the 

same format of the game within the relevant twelve month period, then: 

4.1.2.1  in the case of a Minor Over Rate Offence, (and subject to the qualifying guidance 
notes below), he/she shall apply the mandatory sanctions that are set out in the 
table at Article 4.2, below; or  

35 

 

 

 4.2 

 

4.1.2.2  in the  case of  a  Serious  Over  Rate  Offence,  he/she  shall  take into account  any 
other  factors  that  he/she  deems  relevant  and  appropriate  to  the  mitigation  or 
aggravation of the  nature  of the  Serious Over Rate  Offence before determining, 
in  accordance  with  the  table  at  Article  4.2,  below,  what  the  appropriate 
sanction(s) should be. 

For  the  purposes  of  Minimum  Over  Rate  Offences  only,  the  table  at  Article  7.3  of  the  Code  of 
Conduct shall be replaced with the following:   

 
MINIMUM 
OVER RATE 
OFFENCE 

 
INDIVIDUAL 

 

RANGE OF 

PERMISSIBLE 
SANCTIONS 

(FIRST OFFENCE) 

 

 

RANGE OF PERMISSIBLE SANCTIONS 

(SECOND OFFENCE IN THE SAME FORMAT 

OF THE GAME 

WITHIN 12 MONTHS)  

 
 

 
Minor  
Over Rate 
Offence 
(Article 2.5.1) 

 
Player 

 
Team Captain 

 
10% of Match Fee per over short of Minimum Over Rate. 
 
 
20% of Match Fee 
per over short of 
Minimum Over Rate. 

 
20% of Match Fee per over short of Minimum 
Over Rate  
 
AND 
 
the imposition of a suspension for the 
immediately subsequent one (1) International 
Match in the same format of the game as that in 
which the offence occurred.  
 

 
NOTE: For the avoidance of doubt, where a Team Captain whose team has already been found to have 
committed  two  Minor  Over  Rate  Offences  in  the  same  format  of  the  game  within  a  period  of  twelve 
months, commits  a further  offence in the same format of the  game  in the same twelve month  period, in 
determining  the  sanction  to  be  imposed,  the  latest  offence  shall  be  treated  as  a  first  offence  for  the 
purposes of the table at Article 4.2 above. 
 
NOTE: In an ICC Event (other than the ICC World Cricket League Championship, World Cricket League 
Divisions 2-5 and the ICC Intercontinental Cup) any prior Minimum Over Rate Offence committed by the 
Team Captain in the same format of the game within the preceding twelve month period shall not count 
for the purposes of determining whether a repeat Minimum Over Rate Offence has been committed in the 
ICC  Event.    In  other  words,  at  the  start  of  any  ICC  Event,  all  Team  Captains  will  be  treated,  for  the 
purposes  of  the  ICC  Event  only,  as  having  not  committed  any  Minimum  Over  Rate  Offences  within  the 
previous twelve month period.   
 
Where a Team  Captain  has  been  found  guilty  of  a first  Minimum  Over  Rate  Offence  in  an  International 
Match which does not form part of an ICC Event and then commits a further Minimum Over Rate Offence 
during an ICC Event, he/she will be determined to have committed a second Minimum Over Rate Offence 
for  the  purposes  of  this  Article  4.2  and  consequently  will  be  sanctioned  in  accordance  with  the  table 
above.  Any suspension so imposed will not, however, be imposed in respect of any subsequent Match in 
the  relevant  ICC  Event.    Rather  the  suspension  shall  be  applied  to  the  first  International  Match  in  the 
same format of the game that the Player takes part in subsequent to the ICC Event. 
 
Where a Team Captain has been found guilty of a first Minor Over Rate Offence in an International Match 
which does not form part of an ICC Event and then commits two further Minor Over Rate Offences during 

36 

 

 

an  ICC  Event,  he/she  will  be  suspended  for  his/her  immediately  subsequent  Match  in  the  relevant  ICC 
Event,  and  his/her  Minor  Over  Rate  Offence  count  for  the  ICC  Event  shall  return  to  zero.    In  such 
circumstances,  the  Minor  Over  Rate  Offence  that  was  committed  before  the  ICC  Event  shall,  however, 
continue to stand and will be considered in determining whether the Player has committed a repeat Minor 
Over Rate Offence within twelve months of the first pre-ICC Event offence.    
 
In circumstances where the second of the two Minor Over Rate Offences committed during the ICC Event 
was  committed  in  the  Player’s  final  game  in  the  ICC  Event,  the  suspension  shall  be  applied  to  the  first 
International Match that the Player takes part in subsequent to the ICC Event.   
 
For the avoidance of doubt, for a Team Captain to be suspended for an Over Rate Offence during an ICC 
Event,  he/she  will  need  to  commit  two  Minor  Over  Rate  Offences  or  at  least  one  Serious  Over  Rate 
Offence during the ICC Event. 
 
 

 
MINIMUM 
OVER RATE 
OFFENCE 

 
INDIVIDUAL 

 

 

 

RANGE OF 

PERMISSIBLE 
SANCTIONS 

RANGE OF 

PERMISSIBLE 
SANCTIONS 

(FIRST OFFENCE) 

(SECOND OFFENCE 

IN THE SAME 

 

RANGE OF 

PERMISSIBLE 
SANCTIONS 

(THIRD OFFENCE IN 
THE SAME FORMAT 

FORMAT OF THE 

OF THE GAME WITHIN 

GAME 

12 MONTHS) 

WITHIN 12 MONTHS)  
 

 

 
10% of Match Fee per over short of the Minimum Over Rate for the: (a) 
first five overs in a Test Match (or other International Matches of at least 
four days in duration); or (b) first two overs in any One Day International 
Match, Twenty20 International Match or any other International Match of 
fifty (50) or twenty (20) overs per side 
 
AND 
 
20% of Match Fee per additional over short of the Minimum Over Rate. 
 
 
The imposition of 
two (2) Suspension 
Points.  
 

 
The imposition of 
between two (2) and 
eight (8) Suspension 
Points. 

 
The imposition of 
between eight (8) 
Suspension Points and a 
suspension for one (1) 
year. 
 

 
Player 

 
Serious  
Over Rate 
Offence  
(Article 2.5.2) 

 
Team Captain 

 
 
 
 
 

 

37 

 

 

APPENDIX 3 – MATCH FEES 
 
Unless  otherwise  agreed  in  advance  of  an  International  Match  or  ICC  Event,  for  the  purposes  of  any 
sanctions that are to be applied pursuant to this  Code of Conduct, the following designated  Match Fees 
shall apply:   

 

 

Type of International Match 

Designated Match Fee 

  

 

 

 
Any  men’s  Test  Match,  One  Day  International 
Match or Twenty20 International Matches.   
 

 
All other International Matches.  

the 

the 

ICC’s  Chief  Executive’s  Committee 

 
A  country-specific  amount  which  is  to  be  determined 
by 
in 
relevant  National  Cricket 
consultation  with 
Federations. 
   
 
No Match Fee will be applied.  Accordingly, no Match 
Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  have 
jurisdiction under this Code of Conduct to impose any 
financial  sanctions  against  any  Player  or  Player 
Support  Personnel  for  a  breach  of  this  Code  of 
Conduct. 
range  of 
permissible  sanctions  (set  out  in  the  tables  in  Article 
7.3  and  Article  4  of  Appendix  2)  shall  be  available  to 
the  Match  Referee  and/or  Judicial  Commissioner  in 
full.   
 

  However 

the 

remaining 

 
For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  designated  Match  Fee  to  be  applied  for  the  purposes  of  an  offence 
committed by a Player Support Personnel shall be the same as that which would be applied to a Player 
from the same National Cricket Federation participating in the same International Match. 
 
 
 

38 

 

 

APPENDIX 4 - EXPEDITED PROCEDURE FOR CODE OF CONDUCT 

OFFENCES OCCURING DURING AN ICC EVENT 

Where  a  Code  of  Conduct  offence  is  alleged  to  have  occurred  during,  or  in  relation  to,  an  International 
Match that is played as part of an ICC Event (except the ICC Intercontinental Cup and Shield in which no 
expedited procedure is to  be  applied), the provisions of  the Code of Conduct shall  apply  in full save for 
the amendments described in this Appendix 4, which are deemed to be made in order to ensure that any 
matters arising can be dealt with expediently:  

ARTICLE 3 

REPORTING AN ALLEGED OFFENCE UNDER THE CODE OF CONDUCT  

-  Article 3.2.1.1(b) – “twenty-four (24) hours” is replaced with “eighteen (18) hours”. 

-  Article  3.2.1.2  –  “forty-eight  (48)  hours  (where  the  Report  is  lodged  by  an  Umpire)  or  ninety-six 
(96) hours (where the Report is lodged by the Team Manager or CEO of either of the two relevant 
National Cricket Federations)” is replaced with “eighteen (18) hours”. 

-  Article 3.2.1.3 – “seven (7) days” is replaced with “thirty-six (36) hours”. 

-  Article 3.2.2.1 – “five (5) days” is replaced with “twenty-four (24) hours”. 

-  Article 3.2.2.2 – “seven (7) days” is replaced with “thirty-six (36) hours”. 

-  Article 3.2.3 – “seven (7) days” is replaced with “thirty-six (36) hours”. 

… 

ARTICLE 4 

NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE 

-  Article 4.2.2 – “Article 5.1” is replaced with “Article 5.1.1” 

-  Article 4.2.3 – “Article 5.1” is replaced with “Article 5.1.1” 

-  Article 4.6.2 – “Article 5.2” is replaced with “Article 5.1.2” 

-  Article 4.6.3 – “Article 5.2” is replaced with “Article 5.1.2” 

… 

ARTICLE 5 

THE DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURE  

-  Articles 5.1 and 5.2 are replaced in their entirety with the following: 

5.1 

Where a matter proceeds to a hearing: 

5.1.1  under  Article  4.2.2  or  4.2.3,  then  the  case  shall  be  referred  to  the  Match  Referee  for 

adjudication in accordance with the procedure described in Article 5.2.   

5.1.2  under Article 4.6.2 or 4.6.3, then the ICC shall appoint one member of the ICC’s Code of 
Conduct  Commission  (who  shall  be  independent  of  the  parties,  have  had  no  prior 
involvement with the case and shall not, unless otherwise agreed between the parties, be 
from a country participating in the International Match, during, or in relation to which, the 
alleged offence was committed)  to sit  alone as the Judicial  Commissioner  and the case 

39 

 

 

shall  be referred to  him/her for adjudication in accordance with the procedure  described 
in Article 5.2.   

5.2 

Disciplinary Procedure during an ICC Event 

5.2.1  Subject  to  the  discretion  of  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  to  order 
otherwise for good cause shown by the Player or Player Support Personnel, the hearing 
will take place at the time specified in the Notice of Charge (which should, in the absence 
of exceptional circumstances, be no more than twenty-four (24) hours after the receipt by 
the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel  of  the  Notice  of  Charge)  and  in  the  country  in 
which  the  alleged  offence  was  committed.    For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  nothing  in  this 
Article  5.2.1  prevents  a  hearing  from  being  convened  at  a  time  during  which  the 
International  Match  in  relation  to  which  the  alleged  offence  took  place,  remains  in 
progress.  

5.2.2  The procedure followed at the hearing shall be at the discretion of the  Match Referee or 
Judicial Commissioner, provided that the hearing is conducted in a manner  which offers 
the Player or Player Support Personnel with a fair and reasonable opportunity to present 
evidence  (including  the  right  to  call  and  to  question  witnesses  by  telephone  or  video-
conference where necessary), address the Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner and 
present his/her case. 

5.2.3  The hearing before the Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner shall be in English, and 
certified English translations shall be submitted of any non-English documents put before 
the Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner.  The cost of the translation shall be borne 
by  the  party  offering  the  document(s).    In  the  case  of  a  Level  3  Offence  or  Level  4 
Offence only: (a) if required by the Judicial Commissioner (at his/her discretion), the ICC 
shall  make  arrangements  to  have  the  hearing  recorded  or  transcribed;  and  (b)  if 
requested by  the  Player or Player  Support Personnel, the ICC shall also arrange for an 
interpreter  to  attend  the  hearing.    Such costs  of  transcription and interpretation  shall  be 
paid by the ICC.  

5.2.4  Where video evidence of the alleged offence is available at the hearing before the Match 
Referee or Judicial Commissioner, then it may be relied upon by any party, provided that 
all other parties shall have the right to make such representations in relation to it that they 
may see fit.   

5.2.5  Unless  exceptional  circumstances  apply,  each  of  the  following  individuals  must  attend 
any hearing before the Match Referee or Judicial Commissioner: (a) the Player or Player 
Support  Personnel  who  has  been  charged  with  the  alleged  offence;  and  (b)  the  person 
who  lodged  the  Report  (or,  in  the  case  of  the  ICC’s  Chief  Executive  Officer,  his/her 
representative/nominee).    Where  any  such  individual  has  a  compelling  justification  for 
his/her  non-attendance,  then  they  shall  be  given  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  the 
hearing  before  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  by  telephone  or  video 
conference (if available).  Without prejudice to the  Player or Player  Support Personnel’s 
ability  to  call  and  to  question  such  witnesses  as  may  be  necessary  and/or  to  be 
represented by such other person of his/her own choosing pursuant to Article 5.2.6, one 
of the Team Captain, Team Vice-Captain or Team Manager of the team that the Player or 
Player  Support  Personnel  represents  may  also  attend  such  hearing  before  the  Match 
Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  to  provide  additional  support  and  assistance  to  the 
Player or Player Support Personnel.   

5.2.6  Each of the individuals described in Article 5.2.5(a) and (b) shall have the right (at his/her 
or its own expense) to be represented at the hearing before the Match Referee or Judicial 
Commissioner  by  such  representative  (including  legal  counsel)  of  his/her  or  its  own 

40 

 

 

choosing.    Where  the  person  lodging  the  Report  is  an  Umpire  or  Match  Referee  that 
officiated in the International Match in question or the ICC’s Chief Executive Officer, then 
such person shall be entitled to be represented prior to, and during, the hearing (if he/she 
considers necessary) by a representative of the ICC’s Legal Department. In the case of a 
Level  3  Offence  or  a  Level  4  Offence  only,  where  the  person  lodging  the  Report  is  the 
CEO  of  one  of  the  National  Cricket  Federations  involved  in  the  relevant  International 
Match  (or  his/her  designee),  such  individual  (or  his/her  representative)  shall  have  the 
right to make oral submissions in support of the charge at the hearing. 

5.2.7  The non-attendance of any Player or Player Support Personnel or his/her representative 
at  the  hearing,  shall  not  prevent  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  from 
proceeding  with  the  hearing  in  his/her  absence  and  issuing  a  ruling  in  relation  to  the 
offence charged.   

5.2.8  At  the  end  of  a  hearing,  where  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  considers 
that further evidence is necessary or further time is required to consider the evidence that 
has  been  presented,  he/she  shall  adjourn  the  hearing  for  an  appropriate  period  of  time 
and make such directions as may be necessary.   

5.2.9  Alternatively, at the end of a hearing:  

5.2.9.1 

brought under Article 4.2.2:  

(a)  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  (and,  in  any 
event, no later than twenty-four (24) hours thereafter), the Match Referee 
or  Judicial  Commissioner  will  confirm  the  Player  or  Player  Support 
Personnel’s  admission  that  he/she  had  committed  a  Code  of  Conduct 
offence  and  announce  his/her  decision  in  writing,  with  reasons,  setting 
out:  (a)  what  sanctions,  if  any,  are  to  be  imposed  (including  any  fine 
and/or period of suspension); (b) the date that any period of suspension 
shall  come  into  force  and  effect;  and  (c)  any  rights  of  appeal  that  may 
exist pursuant to Article 8. 

 5.2.9.2 

brought under Article 4.2.3 (or where the Player or Player Support Personnel 
has failed to respond in a timely fashion to the Notice of Charge):  

(a) 

the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  shall  adjourn  the  hearing 
(for a period of no  less than ten (10) minutes and  no  more than two (2) 
hours),  following  which  he/she  will  reconvene  the  hearing  and  verbally 
announce  his/her  finding  as  to  whether  a  Code  of  Conduct  offence  has 
been committed; 

(b)  where  the  Match  Referee  or  Judicial  Commissioner  determines  that  a 
Code  of  Conduct  offence  has  been  committed,  the  Player  or  Player 
Support  Personnel  may  request  a  short  adjournment  (of  no  more  than 
thirty (30) minutes) to prepare any submissions that he/she might wish to 
make in relation to the appropriate sanction that ought to be applied; and   

(c)  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  conclusion  of  the  hearing  (and,  in  any 
event, no later than twenty-four (24) hours thereafter), the Match Referee 
or  Judicial  Commissioner  will  announce  his/her  decision  in  writing,  with 
reasons,  setting  out:  (a)  the  finding  as  to  whether  a  Code  of  Conduct 
offence  had  been  committed;  (b)  what  sanctions,  if  any,  are  to  be 
imposed  (including  any  fine  and/or  period  of  suspension);  (c)  the  date 

41 

 

 

that  any  period  of  suspension  shall  come  into  force  and  effect;  and  (d) 
any rights of appeal that may exist pursuant to Article 8. 

5.2.10  The  Match  Referee  shall  have  the  discretion  to  announce  the  substance  of  his/her 

decision prior to the issue of the written reasoned decision referred to in Article 5.2.9.    

5.2.11  A copy of the written reasoned decision will be provided to the Player or Player Support 
Personnel,  the  CEO  of  the  Player  or  Player  Support  Personnel’s  National  Cricket 
Federation, and the ICC’s Cricket Operations Manager. 

5.2.12  Subject  only  to  the  rights  of  appeal  under  Article  8,  the  Match  Referee’s  or  Judicial 
Commissioner’s decision shall be the full, final and complete disposition of the matter and 
will be binding on all parties. 

… 
 
ARTICLE 8 
 

APPEALS  

-  Article 8.2.3 - “48 hours” is replaced with “24 hours”. 

-  Article 8.2.3.1 – “48 hours” is replaced with “24 hours”.  

-  Article 8.2.3.2 – “Articles 5.1.2 to 5.1.10” is replaced with “the amended Articles 5.1 and 5.2”.  

-  Article 8.2.3.4 – “seven days” is replaced with “48 hours”. 

-  Article 8.3.3 – “seven (7) days” is replaced with “48 hours”. 

-  Article 8.3.3.2 - “Articles 5.2.2 to 5.2.13” is replaced with “the amended Articles 5.1 and 5.2”.  

-  Article 8.3.3.4 – “thirty (30) days” is replaced with “72 hours”. 

 

42 

 

