 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

The International Olympic Committee  

Anti-Doping Rules 

applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in 

Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Olympic Committee 
Château de Vidy 
C.P. 356 
1007 Lausanne 
Telephone no: + 41 21 621 61 11 
Fax no: + 41 21 621 62 16 

 

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTION 

 ................................................................................................. 3 

PREFACE 

 ................................................................................................. 3 

SCOPE OF THESE ANTI-DOPING RULES ........................................................................ 4 

ARTICLE 1 

DEFINITION OF DOPING ............................................................... 5 

ARTICLE 2 

ANTI-DOPING RULE VIOLATIONS .................................................. 5 

ARTICLE 3 

PROOF OF DOPING ...................................................................... 8 

ARTICLE 4 

THE PROHIBITED LIST ................................................................ 10 

ARTICLE 5 

TESTING AND INVESTIGATIONS .................................................. 12 

ARTICLE 6 

ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES ............................................................... 15 

ARTICLE 7 

RESULTS MANAGEMENT .............................................................. 16 

ARTICLE 8 

RIGHT TO BE HEARD .................................................................. 22 

ARTICLE 9 

AUTOMATIC DISQUALIFICATION OF INDIVIDUAL RESULTS ............. 24 

ARTICLE 10  

SANCTIONS ON INDIVIDUALS ...................................................... 24 

ARTICLE 11   

CONSEQUENCES TO TEAMS ......................................................... 25 

ARTICLE 12   

APPEALS ................................................................................... 26 

ARTICLE 13   

CONFIDENTIALITY AND REPORTING ............................................. 29 

ARTICLE 14 

DOPING  AND  MEDICATION  CONTROL  FOR  HORSES  –  EQUINE  ANTI-
DOPING AND CONTROLLED MEDICATION REGULATIONS ................. 32 

ARTICLE 15   

APPLICATION AND RECOGNITION OF DECISIONS .......................... 32 

ARTICLE 16   

STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS .......................................................... 32 

ARTICLE 17   

AMENDMENT AND INTERPRETATION OF ANTI-DOPING RULES ......... 33 

APPENDIX 1 

DEFINITIONS ............................................................................. 34 

 

 
 

 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

2 

INTRODUCTION    

Preface 

The International Olympic Committee (IOC) is the supreme authority of the Olympic 
Movement  and,  in  particular,  the  Olympic  Games.  Any  Person  belonging  in  any 
capacity  whatsoever  to  the  Olympic  Movement  is  bound  by  the  provisions  of  the 
Olympic Charter and shall abide by the decisions of the IOC. 
 
The Olympic Charter reflects the importance that the IOC places on the fight against 
doping  in  sport  and  its  support  for  the  World  Anti-Doping  Code  (the  Code)  as 
adopted by the IOC.  
 
The  IOC  has  established  and  adopted  these  IOC  Anti-Doping  Rules  (Rules)  in 
accordance with the Code, expecting that, in the spirit of sport, it will contribute to 
the fight against doping in the Olympic Movement. The Rules are complemented by 
other  IOC  documents  and  WADA  documents  including  inter  alia  the  International 
Standards.  
 
 
 

 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

3 

 

Scope of these Anti-Doping Rules  

These  Rules  apply  in  connection  with  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games.  They  shall, 
without  limitation,  apply  to  all  Doping  Controls  over  which  the IOC  has  jurisdiction 
in connection with the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 
 
These  Rules  shall,  without  limitation,  apply  automatically  to  (a)  the  IOC;  (b)  all 
Athletes entered in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games or who have otherwise been made 
subject to the authority of the IOC in connection with the Rio 2016 Olympic Games 
(see  below);  (c)  all  Athlete  Support  Personnel  supporting  such  Athletes;  (d)  other 
Persons  participating  in,  or  accredited  to,  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  including, 
without  any  limitation,  International  Federations  and  NOCs;  and  (e)  any  Person 
operating  (even  if  only  temporarily)  under  the  authority  of  the  IOC  in  connection 
with the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 
 
Athletes entered in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games or who have otherwise been made 
subject to the authority of the IOC in connection with the Rio 2016 Olympic Games 
are bound by these Rules as a condition of eligibility to participate in the Rio 2016 
Olympic Games. Athletes shall, without limitation, be subject to the authority of the 
IOC upon being put forward by their NOC as potential participants in the Rio 2016 
Olympic Games in advance of the Period of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games and shall 
in  particular  be  considered  to  be  entered  into  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  upon 
being included in the final NOC delegation list or in any case, upon their signature of 
the Eligibility Conditions Form.  
 
The  Athlete  Support  Personnel  supporting  such  Athletes  and  other  Persons 
participating in, or accredited to, the Rio 2016 Olympic Games are bound by these 
Rules as a condition of such participation or accreditation. 
 
Persons  operating  (even  if  only  temporarily)  under  the  authority  of  the  IOC  in 
connection  with  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  are  bound  by  these  Rules  as  a 
condition of their participation or involvement in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 
 
 
 

 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

4 

ARTICLE 1  DEFINITION OF DOPING 

Doping is defined as the occurrence of one or more of the anti-doping rule violations 
set forth in Article 2.1 through Article 2.10 of these Rules. 

ARTICLE 2  ANTI-DOPING RULE VIOLATIONS  

The  purpose  of  Article  2  is  to  specify  the  circumstances  and  conduct  which 
constitute  anti-doping  rule  violations.  Hearings  in  doping  cases  will  proceed  based 
on the assertion that one or more of these specific rules have been violated. 
 
Athletes or other Persons shall be responsible for knowing what constitutes an anti-
doping rule violation and the substances and methods which have been included on 
the Prohibited List. 
 
The following constitute anti-doping rule violations: 
 

2.1  Presence  of  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  its  Metabolites  or 
Markers in an Athlete’s Sample 

 

2.1.1 It  is  each  Athlete’s  personal  duty  to  ensure  that  no  Prohibited 
Substance  enters  his  or  her  body.    Athletes  are  responsible  for  any 
Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers found to be present 
in  their  Samples.    Accordingly,  it  is  not  necessary  that  intent,  Fault, 
negligence  or  knowing  Use  on  the  Athlete’s  part  be  demonstrated  in 
order to establish an anti-doping rule violation under Article 2.1. 
 
2.1.2 Sufficient proof of an anti-doping rule violation under Article 2.1 
is  established  by  any  of  the  following:    presence  of  a  Prohibited 
Substance  or  its  Metabolites  or  Markers  in  the  Athlete’s  A  Sample 
where the Athlete waives analysis of the B Sample and the B Sample is 
not  analyzed;  or,  where  the  Athlete’s  B  Sample  is  analyzed  and  the 
analysis  of  the  Athlete’s  B  Sample  confirms  the  presence  of  the 
Prohibited  Substance  or  its  Metabolites  or  Markers  found  in  the 
Athlete’s A Sample; or, where the  Athlete’s B Sample is split  into two 
bottles and the analysis of the second bottle confirms the  presence of 
the Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers found in the first 
bottle. 
 
2.1.3 Excepting those substances for which a quantitative threshold is 
specifically  identified  in  the  Prohibited  List,  the  presence  of  any 
quantity  of  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  its  Metabolites  or  Markers  in  an 
Athlete’s Sample shall constitute an anti-doping rule violation. 
 
2.1.4 As an exception to the general rule of Article 2.1, the Prohibited 
List  or  International  Standards  may  establish  special  criteria  for  the 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

evaluation  of  Prohibited  Substances  that  can  also  be  produced 
endogenously. 

2.2  Use  or  Attempted  Use  by  an  Athlete  of  a  Prohibited  Substance 
or a Prohibited Method 

2.2.1 It  is  each  Athlete’s  personal  duty  to  ensure  that  no  Prohibited 
Substance  enters  his  or  her  body  and  that  no  Prohibited  Method  is 
Used.  Accordingly, it is not necessary that intent, Fault, negligence or 
knowing  Use  on  the  Athlete’s  part  be  demonstrated  in  order  to 
establish an anti-doping rule violation for Use of a Prohibited Substance 
or a Prohibited Method.   
 
2.2.2 The  success  or  failure  of  the  Use  or  Attempted  Use  of  a 
Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method  is  not  material.    It  is 
sufficient that the Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method was Used 
or  Attempted  to  be  Used  for  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  to  be 
committed. 

2.3  Evading, Refusing or Failing to Submit to Sample Collection 
 
Evading  Sample  collection,  or  without  compelling  justification,  refusing  or 
failing to submit to Sample collection after notification as authorized in these 
Rules or other applicable anti-doping rules.   

2.4  Whereabouts Failures 
 
Any combination of three missed tests and/or filing failures, as defined in the 
International Standard for Testing and Investigations, within a twelve-month 
period by an Athlete in a Registered Testing Pool.   
 
2.5  Tampering  or  Attempted  Tampering  with  any  part  of  Doping 
Control  
 
Conduct  which  subverts  the  Doping  Control  process  but  which  would  not 
otherwise be included in the definition of Prohibited Methods. Tampering shall 
include, without limitation, intentionally interfering or attempting to interfere 
with  a  Doping  Control  official,  providing  fraudulent  information  to  an  Anti-
Doping  Organization  or  intimidating  or  attempting  to  intimidate  a  potential 
witness. 

2.6  Possession of a Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method   

2.6.1 Possession  by  an  Athlete  In-Competition  of  any  Prohibited 
Substance or any Prohibited Method, or Possession by an Athlete Out-
of-Competition  of  any  Prohibited  Substance  or  any  Prohibited  Method 
which  is  prohibited  Out-of-Competition  unless  the  Athlete  establishes 
that  the  Possession  is  consistent  with  a  Therapeutic  Use  Exemption 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

6 

 

 

 

(“TUE”)  granted  in  accordance  with  Article  4.4  of  the  Code  or  other 
acceptable justification. 
 
2.6.2 Possession  by  an  Athlete  Support  Person  In-Competition  of  any 
Prohibited  Substance  or  any  Prohibited  Method,  or  Possession  by  an 
Athlete  Support  Person  Out-of-Competition  of  any  Prohibited 
Substance  or  any  Prohibited  Method  which  is  prohibited  Out-of-
Competition  in  connection  with  an  Athlete,  Competition  or  training, 
unless  the  Athlete  Support  Person  establishes  that  the  Possession  is 
consistent with a TUE granted to an Athlete in accordance with Article 
4.4 of the Code or other acceptable justification. 

2.7  Trafficking  or  Attempted  Trafficking 
Substance or Prohibited Method 

in  any  Prohibited 

2.8    Administration  or  Attempted  Administration  to  any  Athlete  In-
Competition  of  any  Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method,  or 
Administration  or  Attempted  Administration  to  any  Athlete  Out-of-
Competition  of  any  Prohibited  Substance  or  any  Prohibited  Method 
that is prohibited Out-of-Competition 
 
2.9  Complicity 
 
Assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering up or any other 
type  of  intentional  complicity  involving  an  anti-doping  rule  violation, 
Attempted  anti-doping  rule  violation  or  violation  of  Article  10.12.1  of  the 
Code by another Person. 
 
2.10  Prohibited Association 
 
Association by an Athlete or other Person subject to the authority of an Anti-
Doping  Organization  in  a  professional  or  sport-related  capacity  with  any 
Athlete Support Person who: 

2.10.1    If  subject  to  the  authority  of  an  Anti-Doping  Organization,  is 
serving a period of Ineligibility; or   
 
2.10.2  If not subject to the authority of an Anti-Doping Organization, 
and  where  Ineligibility  has  not  been  addressed 
in  a  results 
management  process  pursuant  to  the  Code,  has  been  convicted  or 
found  in  a  criminal,  disciplinary  or  professional  proceeding  to  have 
engaged  in  conduct  which  would  have  constituted  a  violation  of  anti-
doping  rules  if  Code-compliant  rules  had  been  applicable  to  such 
Person. The disqualifying status of such Person shall be in force for the 
longer  of  six  years  from  the  criminal,  professional  or  disciplinary 
decision  or  the  duration  of  the  criminal,  disciplinary  or  professional 
sanction imposed; or   
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

7 

2.10.3  Is serving as a front or intermediary for an individual described 
in Article 2.10.1 or 2.10.2. 
 

In  order  for  this  provision  to  apply,  it  is  necessary  that  the  Athlete  or  other 
Person has previously been advised in writing by an Anti-Doping Organization 
with jurisdiction over the Athlete or other Person, or by WADA, of the Athlete 
Support  Person’s  disqualifying  status  and  the  potential  Consequence  of 
prohibited  association  and  that  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  can  reasonably 
avoid the association.  The Anti-Doping Organization shall also use reasonable 
efforts to advise the  Athlete Support Person who is the subject of the notice 
to the Athlete or other Person that the Athlete Support Person may, within 15 
days,  come  forward  to  the  Anti-Doping  Organization  to  explain  that  the 
criteria  described  in  Articles  2.10.1  and  2.10.2  do  not  apply  to  him  or  her. 
(Notwithstanding  Article  16,  this  Article  applies  even  when  the  Athlete 
Support  Person’s  disqualifying  conduct  occurred  prior  to  the  effective  date 
provided in Article 25 of the Code.) 
 
The  burden  shall  be  on  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  to  establish  that  any 
association  with  Athlete  Support  Personnel  described  in  Article  2.10.1  or 
2.10.2 is not in a professional or sport-related capacity.  

If the IOC becomes aware of Athlete Support Personnel who meet the criteria 
described in Article 2.10.1, 2.10.2 or 2.10.3, it shall submit that information 
to WADA. 

 

ARTICLE 3  PROOF OF DOPING  

3.1  Burdens and Standards of Proof 
 
The  IOC  shall  have  the  burden  of  establishing  that  an  anti-doping  rule 
violation  has  occurred.  The  standard  of  proof  shall  be  whether  the  IOC  has 
established an anti-doping rule violation to the comfortable satisfaction of the 
hearing panel bearing in mind the seriousness of the allegation which is made. 
This  standard  of  proof  in  all  cases  is  greater  than  a  mere  balance  of 
probability  but  less  than  proof  beyond  a  reasonable  doubt.    Where  these 
Rules  place  the  burden  of  proof  upon  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  alleged  to 
have  committed  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  to  rebut  a  presumption  or 
establish specified facts or circumstances, the standard of proof shall be by a 
balance of probability. 
 
3.2  Methods of Establishing Facts and Presumptions   
 
Facts related to anti-doping rule violations may be established by any reliable 
means, including admissions.  The following rules of proof shall be applicable 
in doping cases: 

 

3.2.1 Analytical  methods  or  decision  limits  approved  by  WADA  after 
consultation  within  the  relevant  scientific  community  and  which  have 

8 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

 

been the subject of peer review are presumed to be scientifically valid.  
Any  Athlete  or  other  Person  seeking  to  rebut  this  presumption  of 
scientific validity shall, as a condition precedent to any such challenge, 
first notify WADA of the challenge and the basis of the challenge. CAS 
on  its  own  initiative  may  also  inform  WADA  of  any  such  challenge.  At 
WADA’s  request,  the  CAS  panel  shall  appoint  an  appropriate  scientific 
expert to assist the panel in its evaluation of the challenge. Within 10 
days of WADA’s receipt of such notice, and WADA’s receipt of the CAS 
file,  WADA  shall  also  have  the  right  to  intervene  as  a  party,  appear 
amicus curiae or otherwise provide evidence in such proceeding. 
 
3.2.2 WADA-accredited  laboratories,  and  other  laboratories  approved 
by  WADA,  are  presumed  to  have  conducted  Sample  analysis  and 
custodial  procedures  in  accordance  with  the  applicable  International 
Standard for Laboratories.  The Athlete or other Person may rebut this 
presumption  by  establishing  that  a  departure  from  the  International 
Standard  for  Laboratories  occurred  which  could  reasonably  have 
caused  the  Adverse  Analytical  Finding.    If  the  Athlete  or  other  Person 
rebuts  the  preceding  presumption  by  showing  that  a  departure  from 
the  International  Standard  for  Laboratories  occurred  which  could 
reasonably  have  caused  the  Adverse  Analytical  Finding,  then  the  IOC 
shall  have  the  burden  to  establish  that  such  departure  did  not  cause 
the Adverse Analytical Finding. 

3.2.3 Departures  from  any  other  applicable  International  Standard  or 
other  anti-doping  rule  or  policy  set  forth  in  the  Code  or  these  Rules 
which did not cause an Adverse Analytical Finding or other anti-doping 
rule  violation  shall  not  invalidate  such  evidence  or  results.    If  the 
Athlete  or  other  Person  establishes  a  departure  from  another 
International  Standard  or  other  anti-doping  rule  or  policy  which  could 
reasonably  have  caused  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  based  on  an 
Adverse Analytical Finding or other anti-doping rule violation, then IOC 
shall  have  the  burden  to  establish  that  such  departure  did  not  cause 
the  Adverse  Analytical  Finding  or  the  factual  basis  for  the  anti-doping 
rule violation. 
 
3.2.4 The  facts  established  by  a  decision  of  a  court  or  professional 
disciplinary  tribunal  of  competent  jurisdiction  which  is  not  the  subject 
of  a  pending  appeal  shall  be  irrebuttable  evidence  against  the  Athlete 
or  other  Person  to  whom  the  decision  pertained  of  those  facts  unless 
the  Athlete  or  other  Person  establishes  that  the  decision  violated 
principles of natural justice. 
 
3.2.5 The  hearing  panel  in  a  hearing  on  an  anti-doping  rule  violation 
(including for the avoidance of doubt, the IOC Disciplinary Commission) 
may  draw  an  inference  adverse  to  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  who  is 
asserted to have committed an anti-doping rule violation based on the 
Athlete’s or other Person’s refusal, after a request made in advance of 
the hearing, to appear at the hearing (either in person or telephonically 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

9 

as  directed  by  the  hearing  panel)  and  to  answer  questions  from  the 
hearing panel or the IOC. 

ARTICLE 4  THE PROHIBITED LIST  

Incorporation of the Prohibited List 

4.1 
 
These Rules incorporate the Prohibited List which is published and revised by 
WADA as described in Article 4.1 of the Code. The NOCs shall be responsible 
for  ensuring  that  their  delegations,  including  their  Athletes,  are  made  aware 
of  such  Prohibited  List.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  ignorance  of  the 
Prohibited List shall not constitute any excuse whatsoever for any Participant 
or  other  Person  participating  in,  or  accredited  to,  the  Rio  2016  Olympic 
Games.   

4.2  Prohibited Substances and Prohibited Methods Identified on the 
Prohibited List 

4.2.1 Prohibited Substances and Prohibited Methods 
 
Unless provided otherwise  in  the  Prohibited List and/or a revision, the 
Prohibited  List  and  revisions  shall  go  into  effect  under  these  Rules 
three months after publication by WADA, without requiring any further 
action by the IOC. 
 
4.2.2  All Athletes and other Persons shall be bound by the Prohibited 
List,  and  any  revisions  thereto,  from  the  date  they  go  into  effect, 
without  further  formality.    It  is  the  responsibility  of  all  Athletes  and 
other  Persons  to  familiarize  themselves  with  the  most  up-to-date 
version of the Prohibited List and all revisions thereto. 
 
4.2.3 Specified Substances 

All  Prohibited  Substances  shall  be  Specified  Substances  except 
substances  in  the  classes  of  anabolic  agents  and  hormones  and  those 
stimulants and hormone antagonists and modulators so identified on the 
Prohibited  List.  The  category  of  Specified  Substances  shall  not  include 
Prohibited Methods. 

 

 

 

 

4.3  WADA’s Determination of the Prohibited List 
 
WADA’s  determination  of  the  Prohibited  Substances  and  Prohibited  Methods 
that  will  be  included  on  the  Prohibited  List,  the  classification  of  substances 
into categories on the Prohibited List, and the classification of a substance as 
prohibited at all times or In-Competition only, is final and shall not be subject 
to  challenge  by  an  Athlete  or  other  Person  based  on  an  argument  that  the 
substance or method was not a masking agent or did not have the potential 
to enhance performance, represent a health risk or violate the spirit of sport. 

10 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

 
4.4  Therapeutic Use Exemptions (“TUEs”) 

in  accordance  with 

4.4.1 The  presence  of  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  its  Metabolites  or 
Markers,  and/or 
the  Use  or  Attempted  Use,  Possession  or 
Administration  or  Attempted  Administration  of  a  Prohibited  Substance 
or  Prohibited  Method  shall  not  be  considered  an  anti-doping  rule 
violation  if  it  is  consistent  with  the  provisions  of  a  TUE  granted  in 
accordance  with  the  International  Standard  for  Therapeutic  Use 
Exemptions.  
 
4.4.2 The  IOC  Medical  and  Scientific  Commission  shall  appoint  a 
Therapeutic Use Exemption Committee of at least three physicians (the 
“TUEC”). Athletes entered into the Rio 2016 Olympic Games who wish 
to  Use  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  a  Prohibited  Method  in  connection 
with  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  and  do  not  already  have  a  TUE 
should  apply  to  the  TUEC  for  a  TUE  as  soon  as  the  need  arises  and, 
unless  there  is  a  good  reason  such  as  a  medical  emergency  or  a  new 
treatment,  at  least  30  days  before  the  start  of  the  Period  of  the  Rio 
2016  Olympic  Games.    The  TUEC  shall  promptly  evaluate  the 
application 
for 
Therapeutic  Use  Exemptions  and  render  a  decision  as  quickly  as 
possible, which decision shall be reported via ADAMS. The IOC Medical 
and  Scientific  Commission  shall  promptly  inform  the  Athlete,  the 
Athlete’s NOC,  WADA  and  the  relevant  International  Federation  of  the 
decision  of  the  TUEC.  The  provisions  of  the  International  Standard  for 
Therapeutic  Use  Exemptions  shall  be  complied  with  during  the  whole 
process and applied automatically. TUEs granted by the TUEC shall be 
effective for the Rio 2016 Olympic Games only. 
 
4.4.3 Where  the  Athlete  already  has  a  TUE  granted  by  his  or  her 
National  Anti-Doping  Organization  or  International  Federation,  he/she 
should file such TUE with the TUEC at least 30 days before the start of 
the Period of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. The TUEC shall be entitled, 
prior to the Period of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games, to review any such 
TUE  in  order  to  ensure  that  it  meets  the  criteria  set  out  in  the 
International  Standard  for  Therapeutic  Use  Exemptions  and,  if 
necessary,  request  the  provision  of  further  supporting  documentation. 
If  the  TUEC  decides  to  review  a  TUE  and  determines  that  it  does  not 
meet the aforementioned criteria, it may refuse to recognize it; in this 
case,  it  must  notify  the  Athlete  and  the  Athlete’s  NOC  promptly, 
explaining its reasons. 

the  International  Standard 

 

 

4.4.4 A  decision  by  the  TUEC  not  to  grant  or  not  to  recognize  a  TUE 
may  be  appealed  by  the  Athlete  exclusively  to  WADA.  If  the  Athlete 
does  not  appeal  (or  WADA  decides  to  uphold  the  refusal  to 
grant/recognize  the  TUE  and  so  rejects  the  appeal),  the  Athlete  may 
not Use the substance or method in question in connection with the Rio 
2016  Olympic  Games,  but  any  TUE  granted  by  his/her  National  Anti-

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

11 

Doping  Organization  or  International  Federation  for  that  substance  or 
method remains valid outside of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 
 
4.4.5 Notwithstanding  Article  4.4.4,  WADA  may  review  the  TUEC’s 
decisions on TUEs at any time, whether upon request by those affected 
or  on  its  own  initiative.  If  the  TUE  decision  being  reviewed  meets  the 
criteria  set  out  in  the  International  Standard  for  Therapeutic  Use 
Exemptions,  WADA  will  not  interfere  with  it.  If  the  TUE  decision  does 
not meet those criteria, WADA will reverse it. 
 
4.4.6 All  TUEs  must  be  managed,  requested  and  declared  through 
ADAMS except in justified circumstances. 

ARTICLE 5  TESTING AND INVESTIGATIONS  

5.1  Purpose of Testing and Investigations 
 
Testing and investigations shall only be undertaken for anti-doping purposes. 
They shall be conducted in conformity with the provisions of the International 
Standard for Testing and Investigations and the specific protocols of the IOC 
supplementing that International Standard.  

 

 

 

5.1.1 Testing  shall  be  undertaken  to  obtain  analytical  evidence  as  to 
the Athlete’s compliance (or non-compliance) with the strict prohibition 
on  the  presence/Use  of  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method. 
Testing  shall  be  conducted  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
applicable International Standard for Testing and Investigations.   
 
5.1.2 Investigations shall be undertaken:  
 

5.1.2.1  in  relation  to  Atypical  Findings,  in  accordance  with 
Article  7.3,  gathering  intelligence  or  evidence  (including,  in 
particular, analytical evidence) in order to determine whether an 
anti-doping  rule  violation  has  occurred  under  Article  2.1  and/or 
Article 2.2; and  
 
5.1.2.2  in  relation  to  other  indications  of  potential  anti-doping 
rule violations, in accordance with Articles 7.4 and 7.5, gathering 
intelligence  or  evidence  (including,  in  particular,  non-analytical 
evidence)  in  order  to  determine  whether  an  anti-doping  rule 
violation has occurred under any of Articles 2.2 to 2.10. 

5.1.3 The IOC may obtain, assess and process anti-doping intelligence 
from  all  available  sources,  to  inform  the  development  of  an  effective, 
intelligent  and  proportionate  test  distribution  plan,  to  plan  Target 
Testing,  and/or  to  form  the  basis  of  an  investigation  into  a  possible 
anti-doping rule violation(s). 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

12 

 

 

 

 

 

5.2  Authority to conduct Testing 

5.2.1 The  IOC  shall  have  In-Competition  and  Out-of-Competition 
Testing  authority  for  the  Period  of  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  and 
Out-of-Competition  Testing  authority  over  all  Athletes  entered  in  the 
Rio 2016 Olympic Games or who have otherwise been made subject to 
the  Testing  authority  of  the  IOC  in  connection  with  the  Rio  2016 
Olympic Games.  

5.2.2 The  IOC  may  require  any  Athlete  over  whom  it  has  Testing 
authority to provide a Sample at any time and at any place.   

5.2.3 Subject to Article  5.3 of the  Code, the IOC shall have exclusive 
authority to initiate and direct  Testing at the Event Venues during the 
Period of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. In accordance with Article 5.3.1 
of the Code, not only the IOC but also other Anti-Doping Organizations 
with  Testing  authority  over  Athletes  participating  at  the  Rio  2016 
Olympic  Games  may  test  such  Athletes  during  the  Period  of  the  Rio 
2016  Olympic  Games  outside  of  the  Event  Venues.  Such  Testing  shall 
be coordinated with, and approved in writing by, the IOC. 
 
5.2.4 WADA shall have In-Competition and Out-of-Competition Testing 
authority as set out in Article 20.7.8 of the Code. 

5.3  Delegation  of  responsibility,  overseeing  and  monitoring  of 
Doping Control 

5.3.1  The IOC may delegate the responsibility for implementing parts of 
the  Doping  Control  in  connection  with  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  to 
the organising committee for the Rio 2016 Olympic Games (RIO 2016) or 
any  Anti-Doping  Organization  it  deems  to  be  appropriate.  Without 
limitation  to  the  foregoing,  the  IOC  has  the  authority  to  appoint  any 
Sample Collection Authority (as defined in the International Standard for 
Testing and Investigations) it deems appropriate to collect Samples on its 
behalf. Such Sample Collection Authority shall comply with the Code and 
the  International  Standard  for  Testing  and  Investigations  in  respect  of 
such Testing. 

5.3.2 The  IOC  Medical  and  Scientific  Commission  and/or  the  IOC 
Medical  and  Scientific  Director  will  be  responsible  for  overseeing  all 
Doping  Control  conducted  by  the  IOC,  RIO  2016  and  any  Anti-Doping 
Organization  providing  Doping  Control  Services  under  its  authority, 
including without  limitation, any Sample Collection Authority collecting 
Samples under its authority. 
   
5.3.3 Doping  Control  may  be  monitored  by  members  of  the  IOC 
Medical  and  Scientific  Commission  or  by  other  qualified  Persons  so 
authorised by the IOC.  
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

13 

5.4  Test Distribution Planning 
 
The  IOC  will  develop  and  implement  an effective  test distribution  plan  for  the 
Rio 2016 Olympic Games complying with the requirements of the International 
Standard  for  Testing  and  Investigations.  The  IOC  shall  provide  WADA  upon 
request with a copy of its test distribution plan.  

 Coordination of Doping Control  

5.5 
 
In  order  to  deliver  an  effective  anti-doping  program  for  the  Rio  2016  Olympic 
Games  and  to  avoid  unnecessary  duplication  in  Doping  Control,  the  IOC  will 
work with WADA, the International Federations, other Anti-Doping Organisations 
and the NOCs to ensure that there is coordination of the Doping Control during 
the Period of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games.  

The  IOC  shall  also  report  information  about  all  completed  tests,  including 
results, to the Independent Observers. 
 
Where  reasonably  feasible,  Testing  shall  be  coordinated  through  ADAMS  or 
another  system  approved  by  WADA  in  order  to  maximize  the  effectiveness  of 
the combined Testing effort and to avoid unnecessary repetitive Testing. 

5.6  Athlete Whereabouts Information 

 

 

 

5.6.1 Where  an  Athlete  is  in  a  Registered  Testing  Pool,  the  IOC  may 
access  his/her  Whereabouts  Filings  (as  defined  in  the  International 
Standard  for  Testing  and  Investigations)  for  the  period  for  which  the 
Athlete  is  subject  to  the  IOC's  Testing  authority.  The  IOC  will  access 
the Athlete's Whereabouts Filings not via the Athlete but rather via the 
International  Federations  or  National  Anti-Doping  Organization  that  is 
receiving the Athlete's Whereabouts Filings.   
 
5.6.2 Upon request by the IOC, NOCs shall provide further details with 
respect  to  the  location  of  Athletes  belonging  to  their  delegation 
(including  Athletes  not  forming  part  of  a  Registered  Testing  Pool) 
during  the  Period  of  the  2016  Rio  Olympic  Games;  such  information 
may include, for example, the name of the building and room number 
at  which  an  Athlete  is  staying  at  the  Olympic  Village  and  his/her 
training  schedules  and  venues.  For  the  avoidance  of  doubt,  the  IOC 
may  use  this  information  for  the  purposes  of  its  Investigations  and 
Doping  Controls  in  connection  with  the  2016  Rio  Olympic  Games.  The 
NOCs shall also provide any further reasonable assistance requested by 
the IOC in order to locate Athletes belonging to their delegation during 
the Period of the 2016 Rio Olympic Games.  
 
5.6.3  Upon  request  by  the  IOC,  Athletes  shall  directly  provide  to  the 
IOC (or make available to the IOC) information regarding their location 
during  the  Period  of  the  2016  Rio  Olympic  Games  (information  as 
mentioned  above  under  5.6.2.),  in  the  manner  requested  by  the  IOC. 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

14 

Athletes  shall  respect  any  time-limit  imposed  by  the  IOC  for  the 
provision of such information. 
 

5.7 

Independent Observer Program 

The  IOC  shall  authorize  and  facilitate  the  Independent  Observer  Program  at 
the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 

ARTICLE 6  ANALYSIS OF SAMPLES  

Samples shall be analyzed in accordance with the following principles: 
 

6.1  Use of Accredited and Approved Laboratories 
 
For purposes of Article 2.1, Samples shall be analyzed only in laboratories (or 
satellite  facilities)  accredited  or  otherwise  approved  by  WADA.  The  choice  of 
the  WADA-accredited  or  WADA-approved  laboratory  used  for  the  Sample 
analysis under these Rules shall be determined by the IOC. 

 

 

6.2  Purpose of Analysis of Samples 
 
Samples  shall  be  analyzed  to  detect  Prohibited  Substances  and  Prohibited 
Methods and other substances as may be directed by WADA pursuant to the 
Monitoring  Program  described  in  Article  4.5  of  the  Code;  or  to  assist  in 
profiling  relevant  parameters  in  an  Athlete’s  urine,  blood  or  other  matrix, 
including  DNA  or  genomic  profiling;  or  for  any  other  legitimate  anti-doping 
purpose. Samples may be collected and stored for future analysis. 
 
6.3  Research on Samples 
 
No  Sample  may  be  used  for  research  without  the  Athlete's  written  consent.  
Samples  used  for  purposes  other  than  Article  6.2  shall  have  any  means  of 
identification  removed  such  that  they  cannot  be  traced  back  to  a  particular 
Athlete. 
 
6.4  Standards for Sample Analysis and Reporting 
 
Laboratories shall  analyze  Samples and report results  in conformity with the 
International  Standard  for  Laboratories.  To  ensure  effective  Testing,  the 
Technical Document referenced at Article 5.4.1 of the Code will establish risk 
assessment-based  Sample  analysis  menus  appropriate  for  particular  sports 
and  sport  disciplines,  and  laboratories  shall  analyze  Samples  in  conformity 
with those menus, except as follows:  

6.4.1 The IOC may request that laboratories analyze its Samples using 
more extensive menus than those described in the Technical Document.  
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

15 

 

6.4.2 As  provided  in  the  International  Standard  for  Laboratories, 
laboratories  at  their  own  initiative  and  expense  may  analyze  Samples 
for  Prohibited  Substances  or  Prohibited  Methods  not  included  on  the 
Sample  analysis  menu  described  in  the  Technical  Document  or 
specified by the Testing authority. Results from any such analysis shall 
be reported and have the same validity and consequence as any other 
analytical result.  

6.5  Further Analysis of Samples 
 
Any Sample may be subject to further analysis by the IOC at any time before 
both  the  A  and  B  Sample  analytical  results  (or  A  Sample  result  where  B 
Sample  analysis  has  been  waived  or  will  not  be  performed)  have  been 
communicated by the IOC to the Athlete as the asserted basis for an Article 
2.1 anti-doping rule violation.  
 
Samples for which the analysis of the A sample has not revealed an Adverse 
Analytical  Finding  may  be  stored.  The  stored  samples  may  be  subject  to 
further analyses at any time for the purpose of article 6.2 by either the  IOC 
or  WADA.  Such  further  analysis  of  Samples  shall  conform  with  the 
requirements  of  the  applicable  International  Standard  for  Laboratories  and 
the applicable International Standard for Testing and Investigations. 

ARTICLE 7  RESULTS MANAGEMENT  

7.1  Responsibility for Conducting Results Management 
 

7.1.1 The  IOC  shall  be  responsible  for  results  management  and  the 
conduct  of  hearings  for  anti-doping  rule  violations  arising  under  these 
Rules  in  relation  to  the  consequences  that  are  specified  at  Articles  9, 
10.1, 10.2.1 and 11. 
 

7.1.1.1  The  IOC  Medical  and  Scientific  Director  (or  a  person 
designated  by  him)  shall  conduct  the  reviews  discussed  in  this 
Article 7.  

 
7.1.2 Responsibility  for  results  management  and  the  conduct  of 
hearings  for  anti-doping  rule  violations  arising  under  these  Rules  in 
relation  to  Consequences  that  extend  beyond  the  Rio  2016  Olympic 
Games shall be referred to the applicable International Federation. 

   
 

7.2  Review  of  Adverse  Analytical  Findings  from  Tests  Initiated 
by IOC 
 
Results  management  in  respect  of  the  results  of  tests  initiated  by  the  IOC 
(including  any  tests  performed  by  WADA  in  respect  of  which  the  IOC  was 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

16 

appointed  as  results  management  authority  by  WADA)  shall  proceed  as 
follows: 

 

from 

the 

from 

the 

the  Athlete, 

International  Standard 

7.2.1 The results from all analyses must be sent to the IOC in encoded 
form,  in  a  report  signed  by  an  authorized  representative  of  the 
laboratory.  All communication must be conducted confidentially and in 
conformity with ADAMS.  
 
7.2.2 Upon  receipt  of  an  Adverse  Analytical  Finding,  the  IOC  shall 
conduct  a  review  to  determine  whether:    (a)  an  applicable  TUE  has 
been  granted  or  will  be  granted  as  provided  in  the  International 
Standard for Therapeutic Use Exemptions, or (b) there is any apparent 
departure 
for  Testing  and 
Investigations  or  International  Standard  for  Laboratories  that  caused 
the Adverse Analytical Finding.   
 
7.2.3 If the review of an Adverse Analytical Finding under Article 7.2.2 
reveals an applicable TUE or departure from the International Standard 
for  Testing  and  Investigations  or  the  International  Standard  for 
Laboratories that caused the Adverse Analytical Finding, the entire test 
shall  be  considered  negative  and 
the  Athlete’s 
International Federation and WADA shall be so informed. 
 
7.2.4 If the review of an Adverse Analytical Finding under Article 7.2.2 
does not reveal an applicable TUE or entitlement to a TUE as provided 
in  the  International  Standard  for  Therapeutic  Use  Exemptions,  or 
departure 
for  Testing  and 
Investigations  or  the  International  Standard  for  Laboratories  that 
caused the Adverse Analytical Finding, the Chairman of the IOC Medical 
and  Scientific  Commission  or  a  person  designated  by  him  shall 
immediately  inform  the  IOC  President  of  the  existence  of  the  Adverse 
Analytical Finding, and the essential details available to him concerning 
the case. The IOC President or a person designated by him shall  then 
promptly  notify  the  Athlete,  the  Athlete’s  NOC,  the  Athlete's 
International  Federation,  WADA  and  a 
the 
Independent Observer Program, in the manner set out in Article 13.1, 
of:  (a) the Adverse Analytical Finding; (b) the anti-doping rule violated; 
(c) the Athlete's right to promptly request the analysis of the B Sample 
or,  failing  such  request,  that  the  B  Sample  analysis  may  be  deemed 
waived;  (d)  the  scheduled  date,  time  and  place  for  the  B  Sample 
analysis if the Athlete or the IOC chooses to request an analysis of the 
B  Sample;  (e)  the  opportunity  for  the  Athlete  and/or  the  Athlete's 
representative  to  attend  the  B  Sample  opening  and  analysis  in 
accordance  with  the  International  Standard  for  Laboratories  if  such 
analysis  is  requested;  and  (f)  the  Athlete's  right  to  request  copies  of 
the A and B Sample laboratory documentation package which includes 
information as required by the International Standard for Laboratories. 
It shall be the responsibility of the NOC to inform the relevant National 
Anti-Doping Organization of the Athlete. The notification of the Athlete 

International  Standard 

representative  of 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

17 

or  other  Person  shall  constitute  the  commencement of  the  proceeding 
in respect of the asserted anti-doping rule violation for the purposes of 
art. 16 of these Rules. 
 
7.2.5 Where requested by the  Athlete or the IOC, arrangements shall 
be made to analyze the B Sample in accordance with the International 
Standard  for  Laboratories.  An  Athlete  may  accept  the  A  Sample 
analytical  results  by  waiving  the  requirement  for  B  Sample  analysis.  
The IOC may nonetheless elect to proceed with the B Sample analysis. 
 
7.2.6 The  Athlete  and/or  his  representative  shall  be  allowed  to  be 
present  at  the  analysis  of  the  B  Sample.  Also,  a  representative  of  the 
IOC or RIO 2016 shall be allowed to be present.  
 
7.2.7 If the B Sample analysis does not confirm the A Sample analysis, 
then  (unless  the  IOC  takes  the  case  forward  as  an  anti-doping  rule 
violation under Article 2.2) the entire test shall be considered negative 
and  the  Athlete,  the  Athlete’s  NOC,  the  Athlete's  International 
Federation  and  WADA  shall  be  so  informed.  It  shall  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  NOC  to  inform  the  relevant  National  Anti-Doping 
Organization of the Athlete.  
 
7.2.8 If  the  B  Sample  analysis  confirms  the  A  Sample  analysis,  the 
findings  shall  be  reported  to  the  Athlete,  the  Athlete’s  NOC,  the 
Athlete's  International  Federation  and  to  WADA.  It  shall  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  NOC  to  inform  the  relevant  National  Anti-Doping 
Organization of the Athlete. 

 
7.3  Review of Atypical Findings 

 

7.3.1 As  provided  in  the  International  Standard  for  Laboratories,  in 
some circumstances, laboratories are directed to report the presence of 
Prohibited  Substances,  which  may  also  be  produced  endogenously,  as 
Atypical  Findings,  i.e.,  as  findings  that  are  subject  to  further 
investigation. 
 
7.3.2 Upon  receipt  of  an  Atypical  Finding,  the  IOC  shall  conduct  a 
review to determine whether:  (a) an applicable TUE has been granted 
or  will  be  granted  as  provided  in  the  International  Standard  for 
Therapeutic  Use  Exemptions,  or  (b)  there  is  any  apparent  departure 
from  the  International  Standard  for  Testing  and  Investigations  or 
International  Standard  for  Laboratories  that  caused  the  Atypical 
Finding.  
 
7.3.3 If the review of an Atypical Finding under Article 7.3.2 reveals an 
applicable  TUE  or  a  departure  from  the  International  Standard  for 
Testing  and 
for 
Laboratories  that  caused  the  Atypical  Finding,  the  entire  test  shall  be 
considered  negative  and  the  Athlete,  the  Athlete’s  NOC,  the  Athlete’s 

International  Standard 

Investigations  or 

the 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

18 

 

 

 

International Federation and WADA shall be so informed. It shall be the 
responsibility  of  the  NOC  to  inform  the  relevant  National  Anti-Doping 
Organization of the Athlete. 
 
7.3.4 If that review does not reveal an applicable  TUE or a departure 
from  the  International  Standard  for  Testing  and  Investigations  or  the 
International  Standard  for  Laboratories  that  caused  the  Atypical 
Finding, the IOC  shall conduct the required investigation or cause it to 
be  conducted.  After  the  investigation  is  completed,  either  the  Atypical 
Finding  will  be  brought  forward  as  an  Adverse  Analytical  Finding,  in 
accordance  with  Article  7.2.4,  or  else  the  Athlete,  the  Athlete’s 
NOC ,the Athlete’s International Federation and WADA shall be notified 
that  the  Atypical  Finding  will  not  be  brought  forward  as  an  Adverse 
Analytical  Finding.  It  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  NOC  to  inform 
the relevant National Anti-Doping Organization of the Athlete.   

7.3.5 The IOC will not provide notice of an Atypical Finding until it has 
completed  its  investigation  and  has  decided  whether  it  will  bring  the 
Atypical  Finding  forward  as  an  Adverse  Analytical  Finding  unless  the 
following circumstance exists: 
 

7.3.5.1  If  IOC  determines  the  B  Sample  should  be  analyzed 
prior to the conclusion of its investigation, it may conduct the B 
Sample  analysis  after  notifying  the  Athlete,  with  such  notice  to 
include a description of the Atypical Finding and the information 
described in Article 7.2.4(d) - (f). 

7.4  Review of Whereabouts Failures 

The IOC shall refer potential filing failures and missed tests (as defined in the 
International  Standard  for  Testing  and  Investigations)  to  whichever  of  the 
Athlete's  International  Federation  and  National  Anti-Doping  Organization 
receives that Athlete's whereabouts filings and so has responsibility for results 
management of whereabouts failures by that Athlete.   

 

7.5  Review  of  Other  Anti-Doping  Rule  Violations  Not  Covered  by 
Articles 7.2 – 7.4 
 
IOC  shall  conduct  any  follow-up  investigation  required  into  a  possible  anti-
doping rule violation not covered by Articles 7.2 to 7.4.  At such time as the 
IOC  is  satisfied  that  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  has  occurred,  it  shall 
promptly give the Athlete or other Person (and the Athlete’s or other Person's 
NOC,  the  Athlete's  International  Federation  and  WADA)  notice  of  the  anti-
doping rule violation asserted, and the basis of that assertion. It shall be the 
responsibility  of  the  NOC  to  inform  the  relevant  National  Anti-Doping 
Organization of the Athlete.  
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

19 

7.6  Provisional Suspensions  
 

Investigations  or 

the 

International  Standard 

7.6.1 Mandatory  Provisional  Suspension:    If  analysis  of  an  A 
Sample  has  resulted  in  an  Adverse  Analytical  Finding  for  a  Prohibited 
Substance that is not a Specified Substance, or for a Prohibited Method, 
and  a  review  in  accordance  with  Article  7.2.2  does  not  reveal  an 
applicable  TUE  or  departure  from  the  International  Standard  for 
Testing  and 
for 
Laboratories  that  caused  the  Adverse  Analytical  Finding,  a  Provisional 
Suspension  shall  be  imposed  by  the  Chairman  of  the  IOC  Disciplinary 
Commission upon or  promptly after the notification described in Article 
7.2.4.     
 
7.6.2 Optional  Provisional  Suspension:    In  case  of  an  Adverse 
Analytical Finding for a Specified Substance, or in the case of any other 
anti-doping  rule  violations  not  covered  by  Article  7.6.1,  the  Chairman 
of  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  may  impose  a  Provisional 
Suspension  on  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  against  whom  the  anti-
doping  rule  violation  is  asserted  at  any  time  after  the  notification 
described in Articles 7.2-7.5 and prior to the final hearing as described 
in Article 8. 

 

 

7.6.3 Where a Provisional Suspension is imposed, whether pursuant to 
Article 7.6.1 or Article 7.6.2, the Athlete or other Person shall be given 
either:  (a)  an  opportunity  for  a  Provisional  Hearing  before  the  IOC 
Disciplinary  Commission  either  before  or  on  a  timely  basis  after 
imposition  of  the  Provisional  Suspension; or  (b)  an  opportunity  for  an 
expedited  final  hearing  before  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  in 
accordance  with  Article  8  on  a  timely  basis  after  imposition  of  the 
Provisional Suspension.  Furthermore, the  Athlete or other Person has 
a  right  to  appeal  from  the  Provisional  Suspension  in  accordance  with 
Article 12.2 (save as set out in Article 7.6.3.1).       

 
7.6.3.1  The  Provisional  Suspension  may  be  lifted  if  the  Athlete 
demonstrates  to  the hearing  panel  that  the  violation  is  likely  to 
have  involved  a  Contaminated  Product.  A  hearing  panel’s 
decision  not  to  lift  a  mandatory  Provisional  Suspension  on 
account  of  the  Athlete’s  assertion  regarding  a  Contaminated 
Product shall not be appealable.  

7.6.4 If  a  Provisional  Suspension  is  imposed  based  on  an  A  Sample 
Adverse  Analytical  Finding  and  subsequent  analysis  of  the  B  Sample 
does not confirm the A  Sample analysis, then the  Athlete  shall  not be 
subject to any further Provisional Suspension on account of a violation 
of  Article  2.1.  In  circumstances  where  the  Athlete  (or  the  Athlete's 
team)  has  been  removed  from  a  Competition  or  Event  based  on  a 
violation of Article 2.1 and the subsequent B Sample analysis does not 
confirm the A  Sample finding, then  if  it  is still possible for the  Athlete 
or team to be reinserted without otherwise affecting the Competition or 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

20 

 

Event,  the  Athlete  or  team  may  continue  to  take  part  in  the 
Competition or Event. In addition, the  Athlete or team may thereafter 
take  part  in  other  Competitions  and  Events  at  the  Rio  2016  Olympic 
Games. 

7.6.5 In  all  cases  where  an  Athlete  or  other  Person  has  been  notified 
of  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  but  a  Provisional  Suspension  has  not 
been imposed on him or her, the Athlete or other Person shall have the 
opportunity to accept a Provisional Suspension voluntarily pending the 
resolution of the matter. 
  

7.7  Resolution Without a Hearing or written defence 
 

7.7.1  An  Athlete  or  other  Person  against  whom  an  anti-doping  rule 
violation  is  asserted  may  admit  that  violation  at  any  time,  waive  a 
hearing and the right to a written defence, and accept the consequences 
applicable under these Rules.   

 

7.7.2  Alternatively, if the Athlete or other Person against whom an anti-
doping rule violation is asserted fails to dispute that assertion within the 
deadline  specified  in  the  notice  sent  by  the  IOC  asserting  the  violation, 
then  he/she  shall  be  deemed  to  have  admitted  the  violation,  to  have 
waived  a  hearing  and  the  right  to  a  written  defence,  and  to  have 
accepted the consequences applicable under these Rules.   
 
7.7.3  In  cases  where  Article  7.7.1  or  Article  7.7.2  applies,  a  hearing 
before  a  hearing  panel  shall  not  be  required.  Instead,  the  IOC 
Disciplinary Commission shall, if it considers that no hearing is necessary 
or desirable, promptly issue a written decision confirming the commission 
of the anti-doping rule violation and imposing the relevant consequences.  
The  IOC  shall  send  copies  of  that  decision  to  other  Anti-Doping 
Organizations  with  a  right  to  appeal  under  Article  12.2.2,  and  shall 
Publicly  Disclose  that  decision  in  accordance  with  Article  13.3.2. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be the responsibility of the  NOC 
to inform the relevant National Anti-Doping Organization of the Athlete. 
 

7.8  Notification of Results Management Decisions 
 
In  all  cases  where  the  IOC  has  asserted  the  commission  of  an  anti-doping 
rule  violation,  withdrawn  the  assertion  of  an  anti-doping  rule  violation, 
imposed a Provisional Suspension, or agreed with an Athlete or other Person 
on the imposition of Consequences without a hearing (or written defence), the 
IOC shall give notice thereof  in accordance with Article 13.2.1 to other Anti-
Doping  Organizations  with  a  right  to  appeal  under  Article  12.2.2. 
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  it  shall  be  the  responsibility  of  the  NOC  to 
inform the relevant National Anti-Doping Organization of the Athlete. 
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

21 

7.9  Retirement from Sport 
 
If  an  Athlete  or  other  Person  retires  while  the  IOC  is  conducting  the  results 
management  process,  the  IOC  retains  jurisdiction  to  complete  its  results 
management process. If an Athlete or other Person retires before any results 
management  process  has  begun,  the  IOC  retains  jurisdiction  to  initiate, 
conduct  and  complete  the  results  management  process  provided  that  the 
Athlete  or  other  Person  was  subject  to  the  these  Rules  at  the  time  of  the 
asserted anti-doping rule violation.   

ARTICLE 8  RIGHT TO BE HEARD 

8.1 

IOC Disciplinary Commission 

 

8.1.1  Where  the  IOC  decides  to  assert  an  anti-doping  rule  violation, 
the IOC President shall promptly set up a Disciplinary Commission. 
 
8.1.2  This  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  shall  consist  of  a  Chairman, 
who  shall  be  the  Chairman  of  the  IOC  Legal  Affairs  Commission  or  a 
member of such Commission designated by the IOC President, plus two 
other persons who are members of the IOC Executive Board and/or of 
the IOC Legal Affairs Commission. No Person may be a member of the 
IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  if  he  (i)  has  the  same  nationality  as  the 
Athlete, or other Person, concerned; (ii) has any declared or apparent 
conflict  of  interest  with  such  Athlete,  the  National  Olympic  Committee 
or  International  Federation  of  such  Athlete  or  any  Person  whatsoever 
involved  in  the  case;  or  (iii)  in  any  way  whatsoever,  does  not  feel 
himself to be free and independent.  
 
8.1.3  The  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  may  be  assisted  by  the  IOC 
Legal  Affairs  Department  and  the  IOC  Medical  and  Scientific 
Department. 

 

8.2  Hearings  and  disciplinary  procedures  of  IOC  Disciplinary 

Commission 

 

8.2.1  In  all  procedures  relating  to  any  alleged  anti-doping  rule 
violation pursuant to  these Rules, the right of any  Person to be heard 
pursuant  to  paragraph  3  to  the  Bye-law  to  Rule  59  of  the  Olympic 
Charter will be exercised solely before the IOC Disciplinary Commission.  
 
8.2.2  The Athlete or other Person shall be offered the option to either 
attend  a  hearing  of  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission,  or  to  submit  a 
defence in writing.  
 
8.2.3  If  the  Athlete,  or  other  Person  elect  to  attend  a  hearing  of  the 
IOC  Disciplinary  Commission,  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  may  be 
accompanied  or  represented  at  the  hearing  by  Persons  of  their  choice 

22 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

 

 

(e.g.  lawyer,  doctor,  etc.),  with  a  maximum  of  three  for  each  of  the 
Athlete or other Person. A representative of the NOC of the Athlete, the 
President  of 
International  Federation  concerned,  or  his 
representative, as well as representatives of the Independent Observer 
Program and WADA shall also be invited to attend the hearing.  

the 

8.2.4 If the Athlete or other Person elect not to attend a hearing of the 
IOC  Disciplinary  Commission,  they  may  submit  a  defence  in  writing, 
which  should  be  delivered  to  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  within 
the deadline set forth by the IOC Disciplinary Commission to that effect. 
 
8.2.5  The IOC Disciplinary Commission shall allow the Athlete or other 
Person  concerned  an  opportunity  to  adduce  any  relevant  evidence, 
which does not require the use of disproportionate means (as decided 
by the IOC Disciplinary Commission), which the Athlete or other Person 
deems  helpful  to  the  defence  of  his  case.  The  IOC  Disciplinary 
Commission may seek the opinion of experts or obtain other evidence 
on 
its  own  motion.  Furthermore,  the  International  Federation 
concerned may request to intervene as an interested third party and to 
adduce evidence. 
 
8.2.6  When  conducted  during  the  Olympic  Games,  the  entire 
disciplinary  procedure  (regardless  of  whether  a  hearing  takes  place) 
shall not ordinarily exceed 24 hours from the time the Athlete or other 
Person  concerned  is  notified  of  the  asserted  anti-doping  rule  violation 
in accordance with Articles 7 and 13 of these Rules. The IOC President 
may  decide  to  extend  this  time  limit  depending  upon  the  specific 
circumstances  of  a  case.  In  any  event,  and  notwithstanding  the 
foregoing,  any  delay  in  the  disciplinary  procedure  shall  not  invalidate 
the  same.  If  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  concerned  and/or  his 
delegation  have  already  left  the  Olympic  host  city,  the  24  hour  target 
referred  to  above  shall  not  apply;  instead,  the  Chairman  of  the  IOC 
Disciplinary  Commission  shall  take  reasonable  measures  that  he 
considers appropriate in the circumstances in order that a decision can 
be made as quickly as possible in accordance with these Rules. 

8.2.7 The IOC Disciplinary Commission shall act in a fair and impartial 
manner  towards  all  parties  at  all  times  but  shall  otherwise  be  free  to 
organise the disciplinary proceedings, including any hearing, and make 
any  necessary  procedural  directions  as  it  sees  fit.  For  example  but 
without  limitation,  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  may  direct  that 
certain  parties  or  persons  may  be  heard  by  teleconference  or  video-
conference (rather than in person) and may decide to consolidate one 
or more related procedures. 
 
8.2.8  Pursuant  to  Rule  59.2.4  of  the  Olympic  Charter,  the  IOC 
Executive  Board  delegates  to  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  all 
powers which are necessary for it to take the measures and sanctions 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

23 

 

envisaged by these Rules including, in particular, Articles 9, 10.1, 10.2 
and 11. 

8.2.9  The  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  shall  issue  a  timely  reasoned 
decision.  The  IOC  President,  or  a  Person  designated  by  him,  shall 
promptly notify such decision to the Athlete or other Person concerned, 
the  relevant  NOC, 
the  International  Federation  concerned,  a 
representative  of  the  Independent  Observer  Program  and  WADA,  by 
sending  a  full  copy  of  the  decision  to  the  addressees.  It  shall  be  the 
responsibility  of  the  NOC  to  inform  the  relevant  National  Anti-Doping 
Organization of the Athlete. 
 
8.2.10  The  decision  of  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  shall  also  be 
Publicly Disclosed  as provided  in Article 13.3 and  may be appealed as 
provided  in  Article  12.  The  principles  contained  at  Article  13.3.6  shall 
be applied in cases involving a Minor.  

ARTICLE 9  AUTOMATIC DISQUALIFICATION OF INDIVIDUAL RESULTS  

An  anti-doping  rule  violation  in  Individual  Sports  in  connection  with  an  In-
Competition test automatically leads to Disqualification of the result obtained 
in the Competition in question (and any other subsequent Competitions in the 
same Event for which the Athlete only qualified as a result of his participation 
in  the  Competition  in  question)  with  all  resulting  Consequences,  including 
forfeiture of any medals, points and prizes. 

ARTICLE 10 SANCTIONS ON INDIVIDUALS  

10.1  Disqualification of Results in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games 
 
An  anti-doping  rule  violation  occurring  during  or  in  connection  with  the  Rio 
2016  Olympic  Games  may,  upon  the  decision  of  the  IOC  Disciplinary 
Commission,  lead  to  Disqualification  of  all  of  the  Athlete's  individual  results 
obtained  in  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  (or  in  one  or  more  Events  or 
Competitions) with all Consequences, including forfeiture of all medals, points 
and prizes, except as provided in Article 10.1.1.  
 
Factors to be included in considering whether to Disqualify other results in the 
Rio  2016  Olympic  Games  might  include,  for  example,  the  seriousness  of  the 
Athlete’s  anti-doping  rule  violation  and  whether  the  Athlete  tested  negative 
further to Testing conducted after other Competitions.   

10.1.1  If  the  Athlete  establishes  that  he  or  she  bears  No  Fault  or 
Negligence for the violation, the Athlete's individual results in the other 
Competitions  shall  not  be  Disqualified,  unless  the  Athlete's  results  in 
Competitions other than the Competition in which the anti-doping rule 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

24 

violation  occurred  were  likely  to  have  been  affected  by  the  Athlete's 
anti-doping rule violation. 

10.2  Ineligibility and other consequences 

10.2.1  Should an Athlete or other Person be found to have committed 
an  anti-doping  rule  violation,  the  IOC  Disciplinary  Commission  may 
declare  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  ineligible  for  such  Competitions  at 
the Rio 2016 Olympic Games in which he/she has not yet participated, 
along  with  other  sanctions  and  measures  which  may  follow,  such  as 
exclusion  of  the  Athlete  and  other  Persons  concerned  from  the  Rio 
2016 Olympic Games and the loss of accreditation. 

No  Person  who  has  been  declared  ineligible  may,  during  the  period  of 
ineligibility, participate in any capacity in the Rio 2016 Olympic Games.  

10.2.2  In  accordance  with  Article  7.1.2,  responsibility  for  results 
management  in  terms  of  sanctions  beyond  the  Rio  2016  Olympic 
Games 
itself  shall  be  referred  to  the  applicable  International 
Federation.  

 

10.3  Automatic Publication of Sanction 
 
A  mandatory  part  of  each  sanction  shall  include  automatic  publication,  as 
provided in Article 13.3. 

ARTICLE 11  CONSEQUENCES TO TEAMS  

11.1  Testing of Team Sports 
 
Where more than one member of a team in a Team Sport has been notified of 
an anti-doping rule violation under Article  7  in connection with  the Rio 2016 
Olympic Games, the IOC shall conduct appropriate Target Testing of the team 
during the Period of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 
 
11.2  Consequences for Team Sports 
 
If  more  than  one  member  of  a  team  in  a  Team  Sport  is  found  to  have 
committed  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  during  the  Period  of  the  Rio  2016 
Olympic Games, the IOC Disciplinary Commission may impose an appropriate 
sanction on the team (e.g., loss of points, Disqualification from a Competition, 
Event or the Rio 2016 Olympic Games, or other sanction) as provided in the 
applicable  rules  of  the  relevant  International  Federation,  in  addition  to  any 
consequences  imposed  upon  the  individual  Athletes  committing  the  anti-
doping rule violation. 
 
If  more  than  two  members  of  a  team  in  a  Team  Sport  are  found  to  have 
committed  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  during  the  Period  of  the  Rio  2016 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

25 

 

Olympic Games, the IOC Disciplinary Commission shall impose an appropriate 
sanction on the team (e.g., loss of points, Disqualification from a Competition, 
Event or the Rio 2016 Olympic Games, or other sanction) as provided in the 
applicable  rules  of  the  relevant  International  Federation,  in  addition  to  any 
consequences  imposed  upon  the  individual  Athletes  committing  the  anti-
doping rule violation. 

11.3  Consequences to Teams in sports which are not Team Sports 
 
If one or more members of a team in a sport which is not a Team Sport but 
where awards are given to teams, is found to have committed an anti-doping 
rule  violation  during  the  Period  of  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games,  the  IOC 
Disciplinary Commission may  impose  appropriate consequences on the team 
(e.g.,  loss  of  points,  Disqualification  from  a  Competition,  Event  or  the  Rio 
2016 Olympic Games, or other sanction) as provided in the applicable rules of 
the  relevant  International  Federation,  in  addition  to  any  consequences 
imposed  upon  the  individual  Athlete(s)  committing  the  anti-doping  rule 
violation. 

ARTICLE 12  APPEALS  

12.1  Decisions Subject to Appeal 
 
Decisions made under these Anti-Doping Rules may be appealed as set forth 
below  in  Article  12.2  through  12.6  or  as  otherwise  provided  in  these  Anti-
Doping  Rules,  the  Code  or  the  International  Standards.  Such  decisions  shall 
remain  in  effect  while  under  appeal  unless  the  appellate  body  orders 
otherwise.   

12.1.1  Scope of Review Not Limited 
 
The scope of review on appeal includes all issues relevant to the matter 
and is expressly not limited to the issues or scope of review before the 
initial decision maker. 
 
12.1.2  CAS Shall Not Defer to the Findings Being Appealed 
 
In  making  its  decision,  CAS  need  not  give  deference  to  the  discretion 
exercised by the body whose decision is being appealed.  

 

 

12.2  Appeals  from  Decisions  Regarding  Anti-Doping  Rule  Violations, 
Consequences, Provisional Suspensions, Recognition of Decisions and 
Jurisdiction   
 
A  decision  that  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  was  committed,  a  decision 
imposing  Consequences  or  not  imposing  Consequences  for  an  anti-doping 
rule violation, or a decision that no anti-doping rule violation was committed; 
a decision that an anti-doping rule violation proceeding cannot go forward for 

26 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

procedural  reasons  (including,  for  example,  prescription);  a  decision  by 
WADA  assigning  results  management  under  Article  7.1  of  the  Code;  a 
decision by the IOC not to bring forward an Adverse Analytical Finding or an 
Atypical  Finding  as  an  anti-doping  rule  violation,  or  a  decision  not  to  go 
forward with an anti-doping rule violation after an investigation under Article 
7.5; a decision to impose a Provisional Suspension as a result of a Provisional 
Hearing;  the  IOC’s  failure  to  comply  with  Article  7.6.1;  a  decision  that  the 
IOC  lacks  jurisdiction  to  rule  on  an  alleged  anti-doping  rule  violation  or  its 
Consequences;  and  a  decision  by  the  IOC  not  to  recognize  another  Anti-
Doping Organization’s decision under Article 15 may be appealed exclusively 
as provided in this Article 12. 

12.2.1 Subject to clause 12.4 below, decisions made under these Anti-
Doping Rules may be appealed exclusively to CAS. 

12.2.2 Persons Entitled to Appeal  
 
The  following  parties  shall  have  the  right  to  appeal  to  CAS:  (a)  the 
Athlete  or  other  Person  who  is  the  subject  of  the  decision  being 
appealed;  (b)  the  relevant  International  Federation;  (c)  the  National 
Anti-Doping  Organization  of  the  Person’s  country  of  residence  or 
countries  where  the  Person  is  a  national  or  license  holder;  and  (d) 
WADA. 
 
Notwithstanding  any  other  provision  herein,  the  only  Person  who  may 
appeal  from  a  Provisional  Suspension  is  the  Athlete  or  other  Person 
upon whom the Provisional Suspension is imposed. 
 
12.2.3 Cross Appeals and other Subsequent Appeals Allowed 

Cross appeals and other subsequent appeals by any respondent named 
in cases brought to CAS under the Code are specifically permitted.  Any 
party  with  a  right  to  appeal  under  this  Article  12  must  file  a  cross 
appeal or subsequent appeal at the latest with the party’s answer. 

 

12.3  Failure to Render a Timely Decision  
 
Where, in a particular case, the IOC Disciplinary Commission fails to render a 
decision with respect to whether an anti-doping rule violation was committed 
within a reasonable deadline set by WADA, WADA may elect to appeal directly 
to CAS as if the IOC Disciplinary Commission had rendered a decision finding 
no  anti-doping  rule  violation.  If  the  CAS  hearing  panel  determines  that  an 
anti-doping rule violation was committed and that WADA acted reasonably in 
electing  to  appeal  directly  to  CAS,  then  WADA’s  costs  and  attorney  fees  in 
prosecuting the appeal shall be reimbursed to WADA by the IOC. 

 

 

 

 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

27 

12.4  Appeals Relating to TUEs 
 
TUE decisions may be appealed exclusively as provided in Article 4.4. 
 
12.5  Notification of Appeal Decisions 
 
Any  Anti-Doping  Organization  that  is  a  party  to  an  appeal  shall  promptly 
provide  the  appeal  decision  to  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  and  to  the  other 
Anti-Doping  Organizations  that  would  have  been  entitled  to  appeal  under 
Article 12.2.2 as provided under Article 13.2.   
 
12.6  Time for Filing Appeals  
 
The time to file an appeal to CAS shall be twenty-one days from the date of 
receipt  of  the  decision  by  the  appealing  party.  The  above  notwithstanding, 
the following shall apply in connection with appeals filed by a party entitled to 
appeal but which was not a party to the proceedings that led to the decision 
being appealed: 
  

a)  Within  fifteen  days  from  notice  of  the  decision,  such  party/ies 
shall  have  the  right  to  request  a  copy  of  the  case  file  from  the 
body that issued the decision; 

 
b) 

If such a request is made within the fifteen-day period, then the 
party  making  such  request  shall  have  twenty-one  days  from 
receipt of the file to file an appeal to CAS. 

 
The  above  notwithstanding,  the  filing  deadline  for  an  appeal  filed  by  WADA 
shall be the later of:  
 

a) 

 
b) 

Twenty-one  days  after  the  last  day  on  which  any  other  party  in 
the case could have appealed; or  

Twenty-one  days  after  WADA’s  receipt  of  the  complete  file 
relating to the decision. 

 
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

28 

ARTICLE 13  CONFIDENTIALITY AND REPORTING  

13.1  Information  Concerning  Adverse  Analytical  Findings,  Atypical 
Findings, and Other Asserted Anti-Doping Rule Violations  

 

 

 

13.1.1    Notice  of  Anti-Doping  Rule  Violations  to  Athletes  and  other 
Persons 

Notice  to  Athletes  or  other  Persons  of  anti-doping  rule  violations 
asserted against them shall occur as provided under Articles 7 and 13 
of these Anti-Doping Rules. 
 
13.1.2  Notice of Anti-Doping Rule Violations to NOCs, a representative 
of  the  Independent  Observer  Program,  the  International  Federation 
concerned and WADA. 
 
Notice  of  the  assertion  of  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  to  the  NOC,  a 
representative of the Independent Observer Program, the International 
Federation concerned and WADA shall occur as provided under Articles 
7  and  13  of  these  Anti-Doping  Rules,  together  with  the  notice  to  the 
Athlete or other Person. 
 
13.1.3   Content of an Anti-Doping Rule Violation Notice 
 
Notification  of  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  under  Article  2.1  shall 
include:    the  Athlete's  name,  country,  sport  and  discipline  within  the 
sport,  the  Athlete’s  competitive  level,  whether  the  test  was  In-
Competition  or  Out-of-Competition,  the  date  of  Sample  collection,  the 
analytical  result  reported  by  the  laboratory,  and  other  information  as 
required by the International Standard for Testing and Investigations. 
 
Notice  of  anti-doping  rule  violations  other  than  under  Article  2.1  shall 
include the rule violated and the basis of the asserted violation. 

13.1.4  It shall be the responsibility of the NOC to inform the relevant 
NADO of the Athlete or other Person of the above-mentioned notices. 
 
13.1.5   Confidentiality 
 
The  recipient  organizations  shall  not  disclose  this  information  beyond 
those  Persons  with  a  need  to  know  (which  would  include  the 
appropriate  personnel  at  the  applicable  National  Olympic  Committee, 
National  Federation,  and  team  in  a  Team  Sport)  until  the  IOC  has 
made  Public  Disclosure  or  has  failed  to  make  Public  Disclosure  as 
required in Article 13.3. 

The  IOC  shall  ensure  that  information  concerning  Adverse  Analytical 
Findings,  Atypical  Findings,  and  other  asserted  anti-doping  rule 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

29 

violations  remains  confidential  until  such  information  is  Publicly 
Disclosed in accordance with Article 13.3. 
 

13.2  Notice  of  Anti-Doping  Rule  Violation  Decisions  and  Request  for 
Files 
 

13.2.1  Anti-doping rule violation decisions rendered pursuant to these 
Anti-Doping Rules shall include the full reasons for the decision. 
 
13.2.2 An Anti-Doping Organization having a right to appeal a decision 
received pursuant to Article 13.2.1 may, within fifteen days of receipt, 
request a copy of the full case file pertaining to the decision.   

 

 

13.3  Public Disclosure 

13.3.1  The identity of any Athlete or other Person who is asserted by 
the  IOC  to  have  committed  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  may  be 
Publicly Disclosed by the IOC only after notice has been provided to the 
Athlete  or  other  Person  in  accordance  with  Article  7  and  also  to  the 
NOC,  a  representative  of  the  Independent  Observer  Program,  WADA 
and  the  International  Federation  of  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  in 
accordance with Article 13.1.2. 
 
13.3.2  No  later  than  twenty  days  after  it  has  been  determined  in  a 
final  appellate  decision  under  Article  12.2.1,  or  such  appeal  has  been 
waived, or a hearing in accordance with Article 8 has been waived, or 
the  assertion  of  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  has  not  been  timely 
challenged, the IOC must Publicly Report the disposition of the matter, 
including  the  sport,  the  anti-doping  rule  violated,  the  name  of  the 
Athlete  or  other  Person  committing  the  violation,  the  Prohibited 
Substance  or  Prohibited  Method 
the 
Consequences  imposed.    The  IOC  must  also  Publicly  Report  within 
twenty days the results of final appeal decisions concerning anti-doping 
rule violations, including the information described above. 
 
13.3.3  In any case where it  is determined, after a hearing or appeal, 
that  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  did  not  commit  an  anti-doping  rule 
violation, the decision may be Publicly Disclosed only with the consent 
of the Athlete or other Person who is the subject of the decision.  The 
IOC  shall  use  reasonable  efforts  to  obtain  such  consent.  If  consent  is 
obtained,  the  IOC  shall  Publicly  Disclose  the  decision  in  its  entirety  or 
in such redacted form as the Athlete or other Person may approve.   
 
13.3.4  Publication shall be accomplished at a minimum by placing the 
required  information  on  the  IOC’s  website  or  publishing  it  through 
other  means  and  leaving  the  information  up  for  the  longer  of  one 
month or the duration of any period of Ineligibility.   
 

(if  any)  and 

involved 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

30 

13.3.5  Neither the IOC, nor any of its officials, shall publicly comment 
on  the  specific  facts  of  any  pending  case  (as  opposed  to  general 
description  of  process  and  science)  except  in  response  to  public 
comments  attributed  to  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  against  whom  an 
anti-doping rule violation is asserted, or their representatives. 
 
13.3.6  The mandatory Public Reporting required in Article 13.3.2 shall 
not be required where the Athlete or other Person who has been found 
to  have  committed  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  is  a  Minor.    Any 
optional  Public  Reporting  in  a  case  involving  a  Minor  shall  be 
proportionate to the facts and circumstances of the case. 
 
13.4  Data Privacy 

13.4.1  The  IOC  may  collect,  store,  process  or  disclose  personal 
information  relating  to  Athletes  and  other  Persons  where  necessary 
and appropriate to conduct their anti-doping activities under the Code, 
the  International  Standards  (including  specifically  the  International 
Standard  for  the  Protection  of  Privacy  and  Personal  Information)  and 
these Anti-Doping Rules. 

13.4.2    Any  Participant  who  submits  information  including  personal 
data to any Person in accordance with these Rules shall be deemed to 
have agreed, pursuant to applicable data protection laws and otherwise, 
that such information may be collected, processed, disclosed and used 
by such Person for the purposes of the implementation of these Rules, 
in  accordance  with  the  International  Standard  for  the  Protection  of 
Privacy  and  Personal  Information  and  otherwise  as  required  to 
implement these Rules.   

 

 

 
13.5  Deemed notifications 

 
Any  notices  under  these  Rules  to  an  Athlete  or  other  Person  who  has 
been  accredited  pursuant  to  the  request  of  an  NOC  may  be 
accomplished by delivery of the notice to that NOC.  
 
Notices under these Rules to an NOC may be accomplished by delivery 
of  the  notice  to  either  the  President,  or  the  Secretary  General,  or  the 
chef  de  mission,  or  the  deputy  chef  de  mission  or  another 
representative of the NOC in question designated for that purpose.  
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

31 

ARTICLE 14  DOPING AND MEDICATION CONTROL FOR HORSES – EQUINE 
ANTI-DOPING AND CONTROLLED MEDICATION REGULATIONS 

the  Fédération  Equestre 

14.1  To  determine  anti-doping  rule  violations,  results  management,  fair 
hearings,  Consequences  of  Anti-Doping  Rules  Violations,  and  appeals 
for  Horses, 
Internationale  (FEI)  has 
established and implements rules (i) that are generally consistent with 
Articles 1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 13 and 17 of the Code and (ii) which include 
a  list  of  prohibited  substances,  appropriate  Testing  procedures  and  a 
list of approved  laboratories for  Sample analysis (its “FEI Equine Anti-
Doping  and  Controlled  Medication  Regulations”  (hereinafter  the  “FEI 
EADCMRs”)  and  the  “FEI  Veterinary  Regulations”  (hereinafter  the  “FEI 
VRs”)).  

 
14.2  Notwithstanding  the  application  by  the  IOC  of  the  present  Rules  to  all 
Athletes  and  Persons,  the  FEI  shall  implement  and  apply  the  rules 
established in relation to Horses, in particular its FEI EADCMRs and FEI 
VRs.  The  FEI  shall  forthwith  provide  to  the  IOC  its  decision(s)  in 
applying the FEI EADCMRs and the FEI VRs. The right of any Person to 
be  heard  in  relation  to  (i)  a  procedure  of  the  FEI  applying  the  FEI 
EADCMRs  and the FEI VRs and (ii) any potential further consequences 
or sanctions from the IOC deriving from a decision of the FEI applying 
the  FEI  EADCMRs  and  the  FEI  VRs,  shall  be  exercised  in  front  of  the 
competent body of the FEI. 

ARTICLE 15  APPLICATION AND RECOGNITION OF DECISIONS  

15.1  Subject  to  the  right  to  appeal  provided  in  Article  12,  Testing, 
Provisional  Suspensions,  hearing  results,  or  other  final  adjudications  of  any 
Signatory which are consistent with the Code and are within that Signatory's 
authority,  shall  be  applicable  worldwide  and  shall  be  recognized  and 
respected by the IOC. 
 
15.2  The  IOC  shall  recognize  the  measures  taken  by  other  bodies  which 
have  not  accepted  the  Code  if  the  rules  of  those  bodies  are  otherwise 
consistent with the Code. 

ARTICLE 16  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS  

No  anti-doping  rule  violation  proceeding  may  be  commenced  against  an  Athlete  or 
other Person unless he or she has been notified of the anti-doping rule violation as 
provided  in  Article  7,  or  notification  has  been  reasonably  attempted,  within  ten 
years from the date the violation is asserted to have occurred. 
 
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

32 

ARTICLE 17  AMENDMENT AND INTERPRETATION OF ANTI-DOPING RULES  

17.1  These Rules may be amended from time to time by the IOC Executive 
Board. The English version of these Rules shall prevail. 
 
17.2  These Rules shall be governed by Swiss law and the Olympic Charter. 
 
17.3  The headings used for the various Parts and Articles of these Rules are 
for convenience only and shall not be deemed part of the substance of these 
Rules  or  to  affect  in  any  way  the  language  of  the  provisions  to  which  they 
refer.  The  masculine  gender  used  in  relation  to  any  physical  Person  shall, 
unless there is a specific provision to the contrary, be understood as including 
the feminine gender. 
 
17.4  The Code and the International Standards shall be considered integral 
parts of these Rules and shall prevail in case of conflict. 
 
17.5  These  Rules  have  been  adopted  pursuant  to  the  applicable  provisions 
of  the  Code  and  shall  be  interpreted  in  a  manner  that  is  consistent  with 
applicable  provisions  of  the  Code.  The  Introduction  and  Appendices  shall  be 
considered  an  integral  part  of  these  Rules.  In  the  event  that  these  Rules  do 
not  cover  an  issue  arising  in  connection  with  such  rules,  the  relevant 
provisions from the Code shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
 
17.6  The  comments  annotating  various  provisions  of  the  Code  are 
incorporated by reference into these Rules, shall be treated as if set out in full 
herein, and shall be used to interpret these Rules. 

 
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

33 

APPENDIX 1 

DEFINITIONS 

 
ADAMS:  The Anti-Doping Administration and Management System is a Web-based 
database management tool for data entry, storage, sharing, and reporting designed 
to assist stakeholders and WADA in their anti-doping operations in conjunction with 
data protection legislation. 
 
Administration:  Providing,  supplying,  supervising, 
facilitating,  or  otherwise 
participating  in  the  Use  or  Attempted  Use  by  another  Person  of  a  Prohibited 
Substance  or  Prohibited  Method.    However,  this  definition  shall  not  include  the 
actions  of  bona  fide  medical  personnel  involving  a  Prohibited  Substance  or 
Prohibited  Method  used  for  genuine  and  legal  therapeutic  purposes  or  other 
acceptable justification and shall not include actions involving Prohibited Substances 
which are not prohibited in Out-of-Competition Testing unless the circumstances as 
a whole demonstrate that such Prohibited Substances are not intended for genuine 
and legal therapeutic purposes or are intended to enhance sport performance. 
 
Adverse  Analytical  Finding:    A  report  from  a  WADA-accredited  laboratory  or  other 
WADA-approved  laboratory  that,  consistent  with  the  International  Standard  for 
Laboratories and related Technical Documents,  identifies  in a  Sample  the presence 
of  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  its  Metabolites  or  Markers  (including  elevated 
quantities of endogenous substances) or evidence of the Use of a Prohibited Method.  
 
Adverse  Passport  Finding:    A  report  identified  as  an  Adverse  Passport  Finding  as 
described in the applicable International Standards. 
 
Anti-Doping  Organization:    A  Signatory  that  is  responsible  for  adopting  rules  for 
initiating,  implementing  or  enforcing  any  part  of  the  Doping  Control  process.    This 
includes,  for  example,  the  International  Olympic  Committee,  the  International 
Paralympic  Committee,  other  Major  Event  Organizations  that  conduct  Testing  at 
their  Events,  WADA, 
International  Federations,  and  National  Anti-Doping 
Organizations.  
 
Athlete:    Any  Person  who  competes,  or  may  potentially  compete,  in  the  Rio  2016 
Olympic Games. 
 
Athlete  Biological  Passport:    The  program  and  methods  of  gathering  and  collating 
data  as  described  in  the  International  Standard  for  Testing  and  Investigations  and 
International Standard for Laboratories. 
 
Athlete Support Personnel:  Any coach, trainer, manager, agent, team staff, official, 
medical,  paramedical  personnel,  parent  or  any  other  Person  working  with,  treating 
or assisting an Athlete participating in or preparing for sports Competition. 
 
Attempt:    Purposely  engaging  in  conduct  that  constitutes  a  substantial  step  in  a 
course  of  conduct  planned  to  culminate  in  the  commission  of  an  anti-doping  rule 
violation.    Provided,  however,  there  shall  be  no  anti-doping  rule  violation  based 
solely  on  an  Attempt  to  commit  a  violation  if  the  Person  renounces  the  Attempt 
prior to it being discovered by a third party not involved in the Attempt. 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

34 

 
Atypical  Finding:    A  report  from  a  WADA-accredited  laboratory  or  other  WADA-
approved  laboratory  which  requires  further  investigation  as  provided  by  the 
International Standard for Laboratories or related Technical Documents prior to the 
determination of an Adverse Analytical Finding. 
 
Atypical  Passport  Finding:  A  report  described  as  an  Atypical  Passport  Finding  as 
described in the applicable International Standards. 
 
CAS:  The Court of Arbitration for Sport; unless the contrary is stated, references to 
the  CAS  shall  include  its  Ad  Hoc  Division  on  the  occasion  of  the  Rio  2016  Olympic 
Games. 
 
Code:  The World Anti-Doping Code. 
 
Competition:  A single race, match, game or singular sport contest.  For example, a 
basketball game or the final of the Olympic 100-meter race in athletics.   
 
Consequences  of  Anti-Doping  Rule  Violations  (“Consequences”):    An  Athlete's  or 
other  Person's  violation  of  an  anti-doping  rule  may  result  in  one  or  more  of  the 
following:    (a)  Disqualification  means  the  Athlete’s  results  in  a  particular 
Competition  or  Event  are  invalidated,  with  all  resulting  Consequences  including 
forfeiture  of  any  medals,  points  and  prizes;  (b)  Ineligibility  means  the  Athlete  or 
other  Person  is  barred  on  account  of  an  anti-doping  rule  violation  for  a  specified 
period of time from participating in any Competition or other activity or funding as 
provided  in  Article 10.12.1  of  the  Code;  (c) Provisional  Suspension  means  the 
Athlete or other Person is barred temporarily from participating in any Competition 
or  activity  prior  to  the  final  decision  at  a  hearing  conducted  under  Article  8;  (d) 
Financial Consequences means a financial sanction imposed for an anti-doping rule 
violation  or  to  recover  costs  associated  with  an  anti-doping  rule  violation;  and  (e) 
Public  Disclosure  or  Public  Reporting  means  the  dissemination  or  distribution  of 
information to the general public or Persons beyond those Persons entitled to earlier 
notification  in  accordance  with  Article  13.  Teams  in  Team  Sports  may  also  be 
subject to Consequences as provided in Article 11. 
 
Contaminated Product:  A product that contains a Prohibited Substance that  is not 
disclosed  on  the  product  label  or  in  information  available  in  a  reasonable  Internet 
search. 
 
Disqualification:  See Consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations above. 
 
Doping Control:  All steps and processes from test distribution planning through to 
ultimate disposition of any appeal including all steps and processes in between such 
as provision of whereabouts information, Sample collection and handling, laboratory 
analysis, TUEs, results management and hearings. 
 
Event:    A  series  of  individual  Competitions  forming  part  of  the  Rio  2016  Olympic 
Games  in  respect  of  which  medals  are  awarded  (e.g.,  the  Men’s  ice  hockey 
tournament, the Women’s 100 metres)). 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

35 

 
Event  Venues:    Those  venues  for  which  it  is  necessary  to  have  an  accreditation, 
ticket  or  permission  from  the  IOC  or  RIO  2016  and  any  other  areas  that  are 
specifically designated as such by the IOC. 
 
Fault:    Fault  is  any  breach  of  duty  or  any  lack  of  care  appropriate  to  a  particular 
situation.    Factors  to  be  taken  into  consideration  in  assessing  an  Athlete  or  other 
Person’s  degree  of  Fault  include,  for  example,  the  Athlete’s  or  other  Person’s 
experience,  whether  the  Athlete  or  other  Person  is  a  Minor,  special  considerations 
such  as  impairment,  the  degree  of  risk  that  should  have  been  perceived  by  the 
Athlete and the level of care and investigation exercised by the Athlete in relation to 
what  should  have  been  the  perceived  level  of  risk.    In  assessing  the  Athlete’s  or 
other  Person’s  degree  of  Fault,  the  circumstances  considered  must  be  specific  and 
relevant  to  explain  the  Athlete’s  or  other  Person’s  departure  from  the  expected 
standard  of  behavior.    Thus,  for  example,  the  fact  that  an  Athlete  would  lose  the 
opportunity to earn large sums of money during a period of Ineligibility, or the fact 
that the Athlete only has a short time left in his or her career, or the timing of the 
sporting  calendar,  would  not  be  relevant  factors  to  be  considered  in  reducing  the 
period of Ineligibility under Article 10.5.1 or 10.5.2 of the Code.   
 
Financial Consequences: See Consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations above. 
 
In-Competition:  For  purposes  of  these  Rules,  “In-Competition”  means  the  period 
commencing twelve hours before a Competition in which the Athlete is scheduled to 
participate through the end of such Competition and the Sample collection process 
related to such Competition. 
 
Independent  Observer  Program:  A  team  of  observers,  under  the  supervision  of 
WADA, who observe and provide guidance on the Doping Control process at certain 
Events and report on their observations. 
 
Individual Sport:  Any sport that is not a Team Sport. 
 
Ineligibility:  See Consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations above. 
 
International  Event:    An  Event  or  Competition  where  the  International  Olympic 
Committee, the International Paralympic Committee, an International Federation, a 
Major  Event  Organization,  or  another  international  sport  organization  is  the  ruling 
body for the Event or appoints the technical officials for the Event. 
 
International  Federations:  shall  mean  an 
international  non-governmental 
organisation,  recognised  by  the  IOC,  administering  one  or  several  sports  at  world 
level and encompassing organisations administering such sports at national level. 
 
International-Level Athlete:  Athletes who compete in sport at the international level, 
as  defined  by  each  International  Federation,  consistent  with  the  International 
Standard for Testing and Investigations. 
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

36 

International  Standard:    A  standard  adopted  by  WADA  in  support  of  the  Code.  
Compliance  with  an  International  Standard  (as  opposed  to  another  alternative 
standard, practice or procedure) shall be sufficient to conclude that the procedures 
addressed  by  the  International  Standard  were  performed  properly.    International 
Standards  shall  include  any  Technical  Documents  issued  pursuant  to  the 
International Standard. 
 
IOC: The International Olympic Committee 
 
Major  Event  Organizations:    The  continental  associations  of  National  Olympic 
Committees  and  other  international  multi-sport  organizations  that  function  as  the 
ruling body for any continental, regional or other International Event. For purposes 
of these Anti-Doping Rules, the Major Event Organization is the IOC. 
  
Marker:    A  compound,  group  of  compounds  or  biological  variable(s)  that  indicates 
the Use of a Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method. 
 
Metabolite:  Any substance produced by a biotransformation process.   
 
Minor:  A natural Person who has not reached the age of eighteen years.   
 
National  Anti-Doping  Organization:    The  entity(ies)  designated  by  each  country  as 
possessing  the  primary  authority  and  responsibility  to  adopt  and  implement  anti-
doping rules, direct the collection of Samples, the management of test results, and 
the conduct of hearings at the national level. If this designation has not been made 
by  the  competent  public  authority(ies),  the  entity  shall  be  the  country’s  National 
Olympic Committee or its designee.   
 
National  Event:    A  sport  Event  or  Competition  involving  International-  or  National-
Level Athletes that is not an International Event. 
 
National  Federation:    A  national  or  regional  entity  which  is  a  member  of  or  is 
recognized by an International Federation as the entity governing the International 
Federation's sport in that nation or region. 
 
National-Level  Athlete:    Athletes  who  compete  in  sport  at  the  national  level,  as 
defined by each National Anti-Doping Organization, consistent with the International 
Standard for Testing and Investigations. 
 
National  Olympic  Committee  or  NOC:  The  organization  recognized  by  the 
International Olympic Committee.  The term National Olympic Committee shall also 
include  the  National  Sport  Confederation  in  those  countries  where  the  National 
Sport Confederation assumes typical National Olympic Committee responsibilities in 
the anti-doping area. 
 
No  Fault  or  Negligence:    The  Athlete  or  other  Person’s  establishing  that  he  or  she 
did  not  know  or  suspect,  and  could  not  reasonably  have  known  or  suspected  even 
with the exercise of utmost caution, that he or she had Used or been administered 
the Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method or otherwise violated an anti-doping 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

37 

rule. Except in the case of a Minor, for any violation of Article 2.1, the Athlete must 
also establish how the Prohibited Substance entered his or her system. 
 
No Significant Fault or Negligence:  The  Athlete or other Person's establishing that 
his or her Fault or negligence, when viewed in the totality of the circumstances and 
taking  into  account  the  criteria  for  No  Fault  or  negligence,  was  not  significant  in 
relationship to the anti-doping rule violation.  Except in the case of a Minor, for any 
violation of Article 2.1, the Athlete must also establish how the Prohibited Substance 
entered his or her system. 
 
Out-of-Competition:  Any period which is not In-Competition. 
 
Participant:  Any Athlete or Athlete Support Person. 
 
Period of the Rio 2016 Olympic Games:  The period commencing on the date of the 
opening  of  the  Olympic  village  for  the  Rio  2016  Olympic  Games,  namely,  24  July 
2016,  up  until  and  including  the  day  of  the  closing  ceremony  of  the  Rio  2016 
Olympic Games, namely, 21 August 2016 . 
 
Person:  A natural Person or an organization or other entity.   
 
Possession:  The actual, physical Possession, or the constructive Possession (which 
shall be found only if the Person has exclusive control or intends to exercise control 
over  the  Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method  or  the  premises  in  which  a 
Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method  exists);  provided,  however,  that  if  the 
Person does not have exclusive control over the Prohibited Substance or Prohibited 
Method or the premises in which a Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method exists, 
constructive  Possession  shall  only  be  found  if  the  Person  knew  about  the  presence 
of  the  Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method  and  intended  to  exercise  control 
over it.  Provided, however, there shall be no anti-doping rule violation based solely 
on  Possession  if,  prior  to  receiving  notification  of  any  kind  that  the  Person  has 
committed  an  anti-doping  rule  violation,  the  Person  has  taken  concrete  action 
demonstrating  that  the  Person  never  intended  to  have  Possession  and  has 
renounced  Possession  by  explicitly  declaring  it  to  an  Anti-Doping  Organization.  
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary  in this definition, the  purchase (including 
by  any  electronic  or  other  means)  of  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method 
constitutes Possession by the Person who makes the purchase. 
 
Prohibited  List:  The  List  identifying  the  Prohibited  Substances  and  Prohibited 
Methods. 
 
Prohibited Method:  Any method so described on the Prohibited List. 
 
Prohibited  Substance:    Any  substance,  or  class  of  substances,  so  described  on  the 
Prohibited List. 
 
Provisional Hearing:  For purposes of Article 7.6, an expedited abbreviated hearing 
occurring prior to a hearing under Article 8 that provides the Athlete with notice and 
an opportunity to be heard in either written or oral form.   

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

38 

 
Provisional Suspension:  See Consequences of Anti-Doping Rule Violations above. 
 
Publicly  Disclose  or  Publicly  Report:    See  Consequences  of  Anti-Doping  Rule 
Violations above.  
 
Regional  Anti-Doping  Organization:  A  regional  entity  designated  by  member 
countries  to  coordinate  and  manage  delegated  areas  of  their  national  anti-doping 
programs, which may include the adoption and implementation of anti-doping rules, 
the  planning  and  collection  of  Samples,  the  management  of  results,  the  review  of 
TUEs,  the  conduct  of  hearings,  and  the  conduct  of  educational  programs  at  a 
regional level. 
 
Registered Testing Pool:  The pool of highest-priority Athletes established separately 
at  the  international  level  by  International  Federations  and  at  the  national  level  by 
National Anti-Doping Organizations, who are subject to focused In-Competition and 
Out-of-Competition  Testing  as  part  of  that  International  Federation's  or  National 
Anti-Doping  Organization's  test  distribution  plan  and  therefore  are  required  to 
provide  whereabouts  information  as  provided  in  Article  5.6  of  the  Code  and  the 
International Standard for Testing and Investigations. 
 
RIO 2016: The organising committee for the Rio 2016 Olympic Games. 
 
Rio 2016 Olympic Games: Games of the XXXI Olympiad in Rio de Janeiro in 2016. 
 
Rules: The International Olympic Committee Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Rio 
2016 Olympic Games 
 
Sample or Specimen:  Any  biological material collected for the  purposes of  Doping 
Control. 
 
Signatories:  Those entities signing the Code and agreeing to comply with the Code, 
as provided in Article 23 of the Code. 
 
Specified Substance:  See Article 4.2.3. 
 
Strict Liability:  The rule which provides that under Article 2.1 and Article 2.2, it is 
not necessary that intent, Fault, negligence, or knowing Use on the Athlete’s part be 
demonstrated  by  the  Anti-Doping  Organization  in  order  to  establish  an  anti-doping 
rule violation.   
 
Substantial  Assistance:    For  purposes  of  Article  10.6.1  of  the  Code,  a  Person 
providing  Substantial  Assistance  must:    (1)  fully  disclose  in  a  signed  written 
statement  all  information  he  or  she  possesses  in  relation  to  anti-doping  rule 
violations,  and  (2)  fully  cooperate  with  the  investigation  and  adjudication  of  any 
case  related  to  that  information,  including,  for  example,  presenting  testimony  at  a 
hearing  if  requested  to  do  so  by  an  Anti-Doping  Organization  or  hearing  panel.  
Further, the information provided must be credible and must comprise an important 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

39 

part  of  any  case  which  is  initiated  or,  if  no  case  is  initiated,  must  have  provided  a 
sufficient basis on which a case could have been brought. 
 
Tampering:    Altering  for  an  improper  purpose  or  in  an  improper  way;  bringing 
improper  influence  to  bear;  interfering  improperly;  obstructing,  misleading  or 
engaging  in  any  fraudulent  conduct  to  alter  results  or  prevent  normal  procedures 
from occurring.   
 
Target Testing:  Selection of specific Athletes for Testing based on criteria set forth 
in the International Standard for Testing and Investigations. 
 
Team  Sport:  A  sport  in  which  the  substitution  of  players  is  permitted  during  a 
Competition. 
 
Testing:  The parts of the Doping Control process involving test distribution planning, 
Sample collection, Sample handling, and Sample transport to the laboratory. 
 
Trafficking:    Selling,  giving,  transporting,  sending,  delivering  or  distributing  (or 
Possessing  for  any  such  purpose)  a  Prohibited  Substance  or  Prohibited  Method 
(either  physically  or  by  any  electronic  or  other  means)  by  an  Athlete,  Athlete 
Support  Person  or  any  other  Person  subject  to  the  jurisdiction  of  an  Anti-Doping 
Organization to any third party; provided, however, this definition shall not include 
the actions of "bona fide" medical personnel involving a Prohibited Substance used 
for  genuine  and  legal  therapeutic  purposes  or  other  acceptable  justification,  and 
shall not include actions involving Prohibited Substances which are not prohibited in 
Out-of-Competition Testing unless the circumstances as a whole demonstrate such 
Prohibited Substances are not intended for genuine and  legal therapeutic purposes 
or are intended to enhance sport performance. 
 
TUE:  Therapeutic Use Exemption, as described in Article 4.4. 
  
UNESCO  Convention:    The  International  Convention  against  Doping  in  Sport 
adopted by the 33rd session of the UNESCO General Conference on 19 October 2005 
including any and all amendments adopted by the States Parties to the Convention 
and  the  Conference  of  Parties  to  the  International  Convention  against  Doping  in 
Sport. 
 
Use:  The utilization, application, ingestion, injection or consumption by any means 
whatsoever of any Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method. 
 
WADA:  The World Anti-Doping Agency. 
 
 

IOC Anti-Doping Rules applicable to the Games of the XXXI Olympiad, in Rio de Janeiro, in 2016 – 
08.06.2015(F) 

40 

