 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

English Language Education 
Key Learning Area 

 

Literature in English 

Curriculum and Assessment Guide 
(Secondary 4 - 6) 

Jointly prepared by the Curriculum Development Council and 
the Hong Kong Examinations and Assessment Authority 

Recommended for use in schools by the Education Bureau 
HKSARG 
2007 (With updates in January 2014)

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Contents 

Preamble 

Acronym 

Chapter 1 

Introduction 

1.1  Background 

1.2  Rationale 

1.3  Curriculum Aims 
1.4 

Interface with the Junior Secondary Curriculum and Post-secondary 
Pathways 

1.5  Cross-curricular Links 

Chapter 2 

Curriculum Framework 

2.1   Design Principles 

2.2   Curriculum Structure and Organisation 

2.3   Strands and Learning Targets 

2.4   Learning Objectives 

2.5   Broad Learning Outcomes 

Chapter 3 

Curriculum Planning 

3.1  Guiding Principles 

3.2  Central Curriculum and School-based Curriculum Development 

3.3  Curriculum Planning Strategies 

3.3.1 

Integrating Classroom Learning and Independent Learning 

3.3.2  Maximising Learning Opportunities 

3.3.3  Catering for Learner Diversity 

3.3.4  Cross-curricular Planning 

3.3.5  Building a Learning Community 

3.3.6  Flexible Class Organisation 

3.3.7  Flexible Use of Learning Time 

3.4  Collaboration within the English Language Education KLA and 

Cross KLA Links 
3.4.1  Collaboration within the English Language Education KLA 

3.4.2  Collaboration with Other KLAs 

3.5  Progression 

3.6  Managing the Curriculum 

Page 

  i 

iii 

1 

1 

1 

2 
2 

3 

5 

5 

6 

8 

9 

11 

13 

13 

14 

14 

14 

15 

15 

15 

16 

16 
16 
17 

17 

17 

17 

18 

Chapter 4 

Learning and Teaching 
4.1  Knowledge and Learning 

4.2  Guiding Principles 

4.3  Approaches and Strategies 

4.3.1  Prose Fiction (the short story and novel) 
4.3.2  Poetry 

4.3.3  Drama 

4.3.4  Film 

4.3.5  Literary Appreciation 

4.3.6  Schools of Literary Criticism 

4.3.7  Assessment for Learning 

4.4  Quality Interaction 

4.5  A Learning Community 

4.6  Catering for Learner Diversity 

4.6.1  General Considerations 

4.6.2  Working with Learners of Different Levels 

4.7  Meaningful Assignments 

Chapter 5 

Assessment 

5.1  The Roles of Assessment 

5.2  Formative and Summative Assessment 

5.3  Assessment Objectives 

5.4 

Internal Assessment 

5.4.1  Guiding Principles 

5.4.2 

Internal Assessment Practices 

5.5  Public Assessment 

5.5.1  Guiding Principles 

5.5.2  Assessment Design 

5.5.3  Public Examination 

5.5.4  School-based Assessment (SBA) 

5.5.5  Standards and Reporting of Results 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Chapter 6 

Effective Use of Learning and Teaching Resources 

26.1  Purpose and Function of Learning and Teaching Resources 

 

 

 

 

6.2  Guiding Principles 

6.3  Types of Resources 

6.3.1  Set Texts 

6.3.2  Other Resource Materials 

6.3.3  The Internet and Other Technologies 

6.3.4  Community Resources 

6.4  Flexible Use of Learning and Teaching Resources 

21 

21 

22 

24 

25 
34 

42 

46 

52 

70 

72 

72 

73 

75 

75 

75 

76 

78 

78 

78 

80 

80 

80 

82 

84 

84 

85 

86 

87 

89 

92 

92 

92 

92 

92 

93 

93 

94 

95 

 

 

 

 

 

6.5  Resource Management 

Examples of Text Sets 

Examples of Poetry Analysis 

Examples of Analysis of Prose Texts 

Preparing for the Public Examination 

Choosing Works to Encourage Wider Reading and Viewing 

Appendices 
1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

Glossary 

References 

 

 

 

Membership of the CDC-HKEAA Committee on Literature in English 

95 

96 

96 

98 

110 

119 

147 

151 

155 

 

 

 

 

(Blank  page) 

Preamble 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

The    Education    and    Manpower    Bureau    (EMB,  now  renamed  Education  Bureau  (EDB))  
stated   in    its    report 1    in    2005    that    the implementation  of a three-year senior secondary 
academic structure would commence at Secondary 4 in September 2009. The senior secondary 

academic  structure  is  supported  by  a  flexible,  coherent  and  diversified  senior  secondary 

curriculum  aimed  at  catering  for  students'  varied  interests,  needs  and  abilities.  This 

Curriculum and Assessment (C&A) Guide is one of the series of documents prepared for the 

senior  secondary  curriculum.  It  is  based  on  the  goals  of  senior  secondary  education  and  on 

other  official  documents  related  to  the  curriculum  and  assessment  reform  since  2000, 

including  the  Basic  Education  Curriculum  Guide  (2002)  and  the  Senior  Secondary 

Curriculum Guide (2007). To gain a full understanding of the connection between education 

at  the  senior  secondary  level  and  the  basic  education  level,  and  how  effective  learning, 

teaching and assessment can be achieved, it is strongly recommended that reference should be 

made to all related documents. 

This  C&A  Guide  is  designed  to  provide  the  rationale  and  aims  of  the  subject  curriculum, 

followed  by  chapters  on  the  curriculum  framework,  curriculum  planning,  pedagogy, 

assessment  and  use  of  learning  and  teaching  resources.  One  key  concept  underlying  the 

senior  secondary  curriculum  is  that  curriculum,  pedagogy  and  assessment  should  be  well 

aligned.  While  learning  and  teaching  strategies  form  an  integral  part  of  the  curriculum  and 

are  conducive  to  promoting  learning  to  learn  and  whole-person  development,  assessment 

should  also  be  recognised  not  only  as  a  means  to  gauge  performance  but  also  to  improve 

learning. To understand the interplay between these three key components, all chapters in the 

C&A Guide should be read in a holistic manner. 

The C&A Guide is jointly prepared by the Curriculum Development Council (CDC) and the 

Hong  Kong  Examinations  and  Assessment  Authority  (HKEAA).  The  CDC  is  an  advisory 

body  that  gives  recommendations  to  the  HKSAR  Government  on  all  matters  relating  to 

curriculum  development  for  the  school  system  from  kindergarten  to  t he   senior  secondary 

level.  Its  membership  includes  heads  of  schools,  practising  teachers,  parents,  employers, 

academics  from  tertiary  institutions,  professionals  from  related  fields/bodies,  representatives 

from  the  HKEAA  and  the  Vocational  Training  Council  (VTC),  as  well  as  officers  from  the 

EDB.  The  HKEAA  is  an  independent  statutory  body  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  public 

assessment,  including  the  assessment  for  the  Hong  Kong  Diploma  of  Secondary  Education 

(HKDSE).  Its  governing  council  includes  members  drawn  from  the  school  sector,  tertiary 

institutions  and  government  bodies,  as  well  as  professionals  and  members  of  the  business 

community. 

1   The report is The New Academic Structure for Senior Secondary Education and Higher Education – Action 
Plan for Investing in the Future of Hong Kong. 

i 

The  C&A  Guide  is  recommended  by  the  EDB  for  use  in  secondary  schools.  The  subject 

curriculum forms  the  basis  of  the  assessment designed  and  administered  by  the  HKEAA.  In 

this  connection,  the  HKEAA  will  issue  a  handbook  to  provide  information  on  the  rules  and 

regulations  of  the  HKDSE  examination  as  well  as  the  structure  and  format  of  public 

assessment for each subject. 

The  CDC  and  HKEAA  will  keep  the  subject  curriculum  under  constant  review  and 

evaluation  in  the  light  of  classroom  experiences,  students’  performance  in  the  public 

assessment,  and  the  changing  needs  of  students  and  society.  All  comments  and  suggestions 

on this C&A Guide may be sent to: 

Chief Curriculum Development Officer (English Language Education) 

Curriculum Development Institute 

Education Bureau 

Room 1206, Wu Chung House 

213 Queen’s Road East 

Wanchai, Hong Kong 

Fax: 2834 7810 

E-mail:ccdoe@edb.gov.hk 

ii 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

AL 

ASL 

C&A 

CDC 

EDB 

EMB 

Acronym 

Advanced Level 

Advanced Supplementary Level 

Curriculum and Assessment 

Curriculum Development Council 

Education Bureau 

Education and Manpower Bureau 

HKALE 

Hong Kong Advanced Level Examination      

HKCEE 

Hong Kong Certificate of Education Examination 

HKDSE 

Hong Kong Diploma of Secondary Education 

HKEAA 

Hong Kong Examinations and Assessment Authority 

HKSAR 

Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 

IT 

KLA 

Information Technology 

Key Learning Area 

S1/2/3/4/5/6 

Secondary 1/2/3/4/5/6 

 

SBA 

VTC 

School-based Assessment 

Vocational Training Council 

 

iii 

(Blank  page) 

 

Chapter 1         Introduction 

This  chapter  provides  the  background,  rationale  and  aims  of  Literature  in  English  as  an 

elective  subject  in  the  three-year  senior  secondary  curriculum,  and  highlights  how  it 

articulates with the junior secondary curriculum, post-secondary education, and future career 

pathways. 

1.1    Background 

The  Literature  in  English  Curriculum  and  Assessment  Guide  (Secondary  4  –  6)  (2007) 

incorporates  the  key  recommendations  made  in  the  CDC’s  Senior  Secondary  Curriculum 

Guide  (2007),  Basic  Education  Curriculum  Guide  –  Building  on  Strengths  (2002),  the  final 

report  on  its  Holistic  Review  of  the  School  Curriculum  entitled  Learn  to  Learn  –  The  Way 

Forward  in  Curriculum  Development  (2001)  and  the  Education  Commission’s  education 

reform    final   report,   Learning  for   Life,   Learning   through   Life   (2000).   The latter four 

documents  provide  the  overall  direction  for  both  education  and  curriculum  development  in 

Hong  Kong  now  and  in  the  years  to  come,  and  seek  to  facilitate  the  accomplishment  of  the 

principal educational aims of lifelong learning and whole-person development. 

The Literature in English Curriculum and Assessment Guide (Secondary 4 – 6) (2007) is built 

on  the  previous  Literature  in  English  curriculum  for  Secondary  4  –  5    as  well  as  the  ASL 

and  AL  Literature in English  curricula.  Following the  general  direction for the development 

of  the  English  Language  Education  curriculum  set  out  in  the  English  Language  Education 

Key  Learning Area Curriculum Guide (Primary 1 – Secondary 3) (2002), it extends the prior 

knowledge, skills and positive values and attitudes that learners develop through the English 

Language  curriculum,  particularly  in  the  area  of  language  arts,  for  basic  education  from 

Primary 1 to Secondary 3 (P1 – S3). 

The  Literature  in  English  Curriculum  and  Assessment  Guide  (Secondary  4  –  6)  (2007) 

delineates the aims, learning targets and objectives of the subject. It also provides guidelines, 

suggestions  and  exemplars  to  promote  effective  learning,  teaching  and  assessment  practices, 

and  to  help  schools  and  teachers  to  plan,  develop  and  implement  their  own  school-based 

Literature in English curriculum. 

1.2    Rationale 

The  rationale  for  studying  Literature  in  English  reinforces  the  guiding  principles  for 

education reform outlined in the Senior Secondary Curriculum Guide (2007): 

1 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

•     It  helps  learners  to  develop  a  humanistic  outlook  on  life.  Through  a  close  interaction 
with literary or creative works which portray a diverse range of human thought, emotion 

and  experience,  learners  gain  knowledge  and  understanding  of  the  nature  of  human 

existence and of the world and the society in which they live. 

•    Representing  the  human  situation  through  a  creative  use  of  language,  literary  or 

creative texts can offer learners much aesthetic, intellectual and emotional pleasure 

•     The study of Literature in English has many practical aspects. 

– 

It  provides  ample  opportunities  for  learners  to  develop  their  creativity,  sharpen  their 

critical and analytical skills, and enhance their language proficiency. 

– 

It  broadens  their  awareness  of  the  culture  of  different  places  where  English  is  used, 

and  enhances  their  appreciation  and  understanding  of  Hong  Kong  as  a  culturally 

diverse society. 

–  The  intellectual,  aesthetic  and  emotional  qualities,  which  learners  develop  through 

studying Literature in English, prepare them for further study or work, particularly in 

areas  such  as  publishing  and  the  media,  where  creativity,  critical  thinking  and 

intercultural understanding are highly valued. 

 
 
 

 
 

1.3    Curriculum Aims 

The aims of the Literature in English curriculum are to enable learners to: 

 
 
•  appreciate  and  enjoy  a  wide  range  of  literary  or  creative  texts  and  other  related  cultural 

forms; 

•  develop  their  capacity  for  critical  thinking,  creativity,  self-expression,  personal  growth, 

empathy and cultural understanding; 

•  enhance their awareness of the relationship between literature and society; 
•  develop a greater sensitivity to the nuances of the English language; and 
•  be adequately prepared for areas of further study or work, where qualities promoted in the 
study  of  literature,  such  as  creativity,  critical  thinking  and  inter-cultural  understanding, 

are highly valued. 

 
 

 
 

 

1.4    Interface with the Junior Secondary Curriculum and 

Post-secondary Pathways 

The senior secondary Literature in English curriculum aims to capitalise on students’ learning 

of  English  at the  junior  secondary  level  to  further  enhance  their  language  proficiency  

and  develop  their  critical  abilities,  aesthetic  sensitivity  and  cultural  awareness.  To  enable 

learners  to  effectively  meet  the  challenges  of  the  senior  secondary  Literature  in  English 

curriculum, a solid foundation of knowledge and skills in English Language has to be laid at 

the junior secondary level. Schools are encouraged to: 

2 

•  promote  a  culture  of  reading  among  learners,  by  exposing  them  to  a  wide  spectrum  of 
language  arts  materials,  including  imaginative  or  literary  texts  (notably,  poems,  songs, 

dramatic texts, short stories, films); and 

•  enhance the learning of English in the Experience Strand through the use of language arts 
materials to help learners to develop a range of knowledge, skills and qualities critical for 

the study of Literature in English, including: 

–  an enjoyment of reading; 

– 

increased awareness and appreciation of literature as a subject; 

–  knowledge of the features of various literary genres such as prose, poetry and drama; 

– 

reasoning, analytical and critical skills; 

–  sensitivity to the use of the English language; and 

–  creativity  and  the  power  to  formulate  and  express  informed  and  imaginative  views 

and responses. 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

By broadening and enriching learners’ knowledge, skills and experience, the senior secondary 

Literature in English curriculum also provides a firm foundation for further study, vocational 

training  or  work.  It  opens  up  a  variety  of  post-secondary  education  and  career  pathways, 

particularly  in  the  areas  of  media  production,  performing  arts,  teaching,  law  and  social 

sciences. 

1.5    Cross-curricular Links 

Teachers  need  to  foster  coherence  between  Literature  in  English  and  English  Language,  as 

well  as  other  subjects,  through  cross-curricular  collaboration.  Such  a  vision  is  rooted  in  the 

belief  that  learners  should  explore  knowledge  and  gain  experience  in  a  more  integrated 

manner. When they are able to make connections among ideas and concepts, their motivation 

will be raised. Likewise, the knowledge they acquire, and the skills and positive attitudes they 

develop  in  each  key  learning  area  (KLA),  will  also  be  enhanced.  For  details  about  how 

cross-curricular collaboration can be achieved through curriculum planning and development 

in Literature in English, please refer to sections 3.3.4 and 3.4.2. 

3 

(Blank  page) 

 

4 

Chapter 2         Curriculum Framework 

The  curriculum  framework  for  Literature  in  English  embodies  the  key  knowledge,  skills, 

values  and  attitudes  that  students  should  develop  at  the  senior  secondary  level.  It  forms  the 

basis  on  which  schools  and  teachers  can  plan  their  school-based  curriculum,  and  design 

appropriate learning, teaching and assessment activities. 

2.1    Design Principles 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

The  design  of  the  senior  secondary  Literature  in  English  curriculum  is  founded  on  the 

following  principles,  which  are  in  line  with  those  recommended  in  the  Senior  Secondary 

Curriculum Guide (2007): 

 
 
•  Building  on  the  knowledge,  skills,  values  and  attitudes  that  learners  have  developed 

through the English Language curriculum for basic education from P1 to S3; 

•  Achieving  a  balance  between  breadth  and  depth  in  the  study  of  the  subject  to  facilitate 

articulation to further study/vocational training, or entry into the workforce; 

•  Achieving  a  balance  between  theoretical  and  applied  learning,  by  giving  emphasis  to 
learners’  ability  to  demonstrate  knowledge  of  literary  texts  and  apply  critical  and 

analytical skills and creativity in literary appreciation and personal responses; 

•  Providing a balanced and flexible curriculum to cater for learners’ diverse needs, interests 

and abilities; 

•  Promoting  independent  and  lifelong  learning  through  developing  students’ learning  how 
to  learn skills and encouraging learner-centred pedagogical  approaches involving inquiry 

and problem-solving; 

•  Setting out a framework for progression to facilitate school-based curriculum planning; 
•  Fostering greater coherence between Literature in English and the other subjects through 

encouraging cross-curricular collaboration; and 

•  Ensuring close alignment between curriculum and assessment. 

 

5 

2.2    Curriculum Structure and Organisation 

 
 

The  curriculum  framework  for  Literature  in  English  provides  the  overall  structure  for 

organising  learning  and  teaching  for  the  subject.  It  comprises  a  set  of  interlocking 

components including: 

 
 
•  subject  knowledge  and  skills,  which  are  expressed  in  the  form  of  learning  targets  in  the 
Strands  of  Knowledge  of  Literary  Forms  and  Conventions,  Appreciation  and  Response, 

and Language Enhancement, as well as learning objectives; 

•  generic skills; and 
•  positive values and attitudes. 
 
 

The  framework  sets  out  what  learners  should  know,  value  and  be  able  to  do  in  the  study  of 

Literature in English at the senior secondary level. It gives schools and teachers flexibility and 

ownership to plan and develop alternative curriculum modes to meet their varied needs. 

Figure  2.1  on  the  following  page  is  a  diagrammatic  representation  highlighting  the  major 

components of the Literature in English curriculum framework. 

6 

 
 

 

Figure 2.1 Diagrammatic Representation of the 

Literature in English Curriculum Framework 

The Literature in English Curriculum 

provides learners with learning experiences to appreciate and 

enjoy literature, encourage self-expression and creativity, 

enhance their critical and analytical skills, improve their 

competence in the use of English, develop their cultural 

understanding as well as positive values and attitudes conducive 

to lifelong learning, and prepare them for further study or work. 

Strands highlight the major purposes for which Literature in English is learned in 
Hong Kong and are used to organise learning content and activities for developing 

Strands 

learners’ knowledge (general and linguistic), 

skills (language, communication and learning how to learn), 

values and attitudes as a holistic process 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

Knowledge of 

Appreciation 

Literary Forms 

and Conventions 

and 

Response 

 
 

 

 
 
 

Language 

Enhancement 

V
a
l

u
e
s
 

a
n
d
A

 

t
t
i
t
u
d
e
s
 

 
s
l
l
i

k
S
 
c
i
r
e
n
e
G
 
e
n
N

i

Flexible and diversified modes of 

curriculum planning 

+ 

Effective learning, teaching and assessment 

Overall Aims and Learning Targets of 

Literature in English 

7 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Literature  in  English,  as  an  elective  subject,  accounts  for  about  250  hours 1 in  the  senior 
secondary curriculum. Lesson time should be allocated according to learners’ needs with due 

consideration  of  their  strengths  and  weaknesses.  Equal  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  the 

various  genres  of  prose,  poetry,  drama  and  film  that  learners  are  required  to  study  in  the 

subject, and sufficient time should be allocated for initiating desired responses from learners 

and providing advice and support on portfolio work and other related learning activities. 

The following is a suggested time allocation for the Literature in English curriculum: 

 

Percentage of lesson time 
(approx. number of hours) 

•  Study of Set Texts 
•  Literary Appreciation 
•  Portfolio (Group work/Individual tutorials) 

60% 

(150 hours) 

25% 

(60 hours) 

15% 

(40 hours) 

2.3    Strands and Learning Targets 

Strands  are  categories  for  organising  the  curriculum.  In  Literature  in  English,  three 

interrelated  Strands  –  Knowledge  of  Literary  Forms  and  Conventions,  Appreciation  and 

Response and Language Enhancement – are employed as content organisers. They define the 

major targets or purposes of studying literature, as listed below: 

Knowledge of Literary Forms and Conventions 

•  To  recognise  the  major  features  of  literary  or  creative  forms  such  as  prose,  poetry, 

drama and film 

•  To  understand  literary  terms  and  concepts  and  to  apply  them  appropriately  in 

appreciating, discussing and evaluating literary or creative texts 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

                                                           
 

1 The lesson time for Liberal Studies and each elective subject is 250 hours (or 10% of the total allocation time) for 
planning  purpose,  and  schools  have  the  flexibility  to  allocate  lesson  time  at  their  discretion  in  order  to  enhance 
learning and teaching effectiveness and cater for students’ needs.   

“250  hours”  is  the  planning  parameter  for  each  elective  subject  to  meet  local  curriculum  needs  as  well  as 
requirements  of  international  benchmarking.  In  view  of  the  need  to  cater  for  schools  with  students  of  various 
abilities  and  interests,  particularly  the  lower  achievers,  “270  hours”  was  recommended  to  facilitate  schools’ 
planning at the initial stage and to provide more time for teachers to attempt various teaching methods for the NSS 
curriculum. Based on the calculation of each elective subject taking up 10% of the total allocation time, 2500 hours 
is the basis for planning the 3-year senior secondary curriculum. This concurs with the reality check and feedback 
collected from schools in the short-term review, and a flexible range of 2400±200 hours is recommended to further 
cater for school and learner diversity.  

As always, the amount of time spent in learning and teaching is governed by a variety of factors, including whole-
school  curriculum  planning,  learners’  abilities  and  needs,  students’  prior  knowledge,  teaching  and  assessment 
strategies, teaching styles and the number of subjects offered. Schools should exercise professional judgement and 
flexibility  over  time  allocation  to  achieve  specific  curriculum  aims  and  objectives  as  well  as  to  suit  students' 
specific needs and the school context.  

 

 

8 

Appreciation and Response 

•  To  develop  one’s   critical  and  interpretative  abilities  through  understanding   and 

appreciating literary or creative texts 

•  To develop informed, personal response and judgement through interacting closely with 

literary or creative texts and relating them to one’s own experience 

•  To  enhance  one’s  cultural  understanding  through  appreciating  the  interconnections 
within  and  between  texts  and  developing  an  increased  awareness  of  the  relationship 

between literature and society 

•  To    develop    creativity    and    powers    of    self-expression    through    producing    works  

ofdifferent literary genres including prose, poetry and drama 

Language Enhancement 

•  To enhance one’s language skills as well as vocabulary through studying and viewing a 

wide range of literary or creative texts 

•  To  develop  awareness  of  subtleties  of  language  and  of  register  and  appropriateness 

through close interaction with a variety of literary or creative texts 

•  To gain  greater awareness of the phonological system of English through appreciation 

and use of literary sound devices 

2.4    Learning Objectives 

The  Literature  in  English  curriculum  comprises  learning  objectives  or  focuses,  which 

embody the essential content of learning for the subject. They include: 

Subject Knowledge and Skills 

Knowledge of Literary or Creative Works 

The key learning objective or focus of the curriculum is to examine literary or creative works 

in the genres of prose, poetry, drama and film. Examples of the sort of texts that students of 

literature  will  engage  with  are  provided  in  Appendix  1.  Through  exploring  these  texts, 

learners are encouraged to achieve a range of other objectives, including the skills of literary 

comprehension  and  appreciation,  and  literary  competence  development  strategies,  as  listed 

below. 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Skills of Literary Comprehension and Appreciation 

These include skills in: 
•  examining and discussing form and content, showing: 

−  comprehension of the thoughts and feelings conveyed in the texts; 

−  analytical and critical appreciation of the language, technique and style through 

which these thoughts and feelings are expressed (such as the use of tone and irony); 

•  comparing and contrasting literary or creative texts in terms of themes, characterisation, 

 

9 

language, technique and style; 

•  expressing  feelings  and  ideas  in  response  to  literary  and  creative  texts  freely  and 

imaginatively; 

•  making connections between literary or creative texts and other cultural media (such as 

paintings, sculpture and photography) and/or issues of importance in society; 

•  applying some of the techniques learned to one’s own creative work; 
•  developing an interest in following up references and allusions; and 
•  understanding that text interpretation is influenced by the dynamic interplay between text, 

context and the reader’s background knowledge. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

Literary Competence Development Strategies 

To facilitate literary comprehension and appreciation, learners are encouraged to develop the 

following sub-skills: 

•  Information skills 

−  planning  and  using  different  sources,  including  electronic  sources,  to  search  for  and 

select  required  information  (e.g.  on  writers,  contexts,  and  the  cultural  or  social 

background of literary or creative texts) 

− exploring, developing and exchanging information to derive new ideas 

− presenting  ideas  or  information,  making  use  of  different  computer  software  and 

incorporating visuals/images to enhance effectiveness 

•  Working with others 

− communicating ideas about literary or creative texts clearly and precisely 

− negotiating the possible meanings of literary or creative texts 

−  discussing  and  debating  literary  or  creative  works,  expressing  one’s  critical  analyses, 

personal views or responses 

−  planning  and  producing  a  group  presentation/performance/creative  work,  agreeing  on 

tasks, responsibilities and working arrangements 

− reviewing group or individual presentation/performance/creative work and reflecting on 

ways to enhance collaborative work or make improvements 

•  Developing reflective thinking and self-motivation 

− planning, managing and evaluating one’s own learning 

−  planning  one’s  personal  reading  of  texts,  possibly  beyond  the  set  texts,  prioritising 

actions and managing time effectively 

− seeking  or  creating  opportunities  to  broaden  and  deepen  one’s  own  learning  by 

soliciting feedback and support from various sources 

− reviewing progress and identifying actions for improving performance 

Generic Skills 

Generic skills enable learners to learn how to learn. Altogether, nine types of  generic skills 

have been identified: 

10 

information technology skills; 

 
•  collaboration skills; 
•  communication skills; 
•  creativity; 
•  critical thinking skills; 
• 
•  numeracy skills; 
•  problem-solving skills; 
•  self-management skills; and 
•  study skills. 
 
 

These  skills  are  to  be  developed  through  learning  and  teaching  in  all  the  KLAs.  To  a  large 

extent,  they  are  embedded  in  the  curriculum  content  of  Literature  in  English.  Collaboration, 

communication, creativity, critical thinking, problem-solving and study skills are in particular 

nurtured through its delivery. 

Values and Attitudes 

 
 

 
 

The  values  that  we  develop  underpin  our  conduct  and  decisions.  They  can  be  positive  or 

negative  in  effect.  Learners  need  to  develop  positive  attitudes  such  as  responsibility, 

open-mindedness  and  co-operativeness  for  healthy  development.  Literature  in  English,  in 

particular, aims to help learners to: 

 
 
•  gain pleasure and enjoyment from reading and viewing literary or creative works; 
• 

 develop  a  keen  interest  in  reading  and  viewing  literary  or  creative  works  and  in 

responding to them through oral, written and performative means; 

•  appreciate the beauty, flexibility and play of language at its best; 
•  empathise with others; 
•  gain   increased   awareness   of   human   relationships  and  the  interaction  between  the 

individual and society; and 

•  appreciate different cultures, attitudes and belief systems. 
 
 

2.5    Broad Learning Outcomes 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

The following broad learning outcomes provide an overall picture of what learners should be 

able  to  do  in  their  study  of  Literature  in  English  by  the  end  of  S6.  They  form  the  basis  on 

which  the  assessment  objectives  for  Literature  in  English  at  the  senior  secondary  level 

presented in Chapter 5, “Assessment”, are built. 

Knowledge of Literary Forms and Conventions 

•  demonstrate  understanding  of  literary  terms,  techniques  and  concepts  by  using  them  

11 

appropriately in critical discussions or analyses 

•  demonstrate  an  awareness  of  the  conventions  of  different  genres  in  critical  discussions  

and analyses 

 

Appreciation and Response 

•  demonstrate  a  greater  knowledge  of  the  rich  variety  of  literature  in  English  through  

discussing the works they have read or viewed 

•  demonstrate  understanding  of  the  different  aspects  of  literary  and  creative  texts  through  

critical analyses and projects done individually or in groups 

•  demonstrate  an  understanding  that  text  interpretation  is  influenced  by  the  interplay  

between text, context and the reader 

•  express personal responses to texts by articulating and elaborating feelings and emotions,  

or by other means such as producing imaginative expansions of texts 

•  express with confidence ideas and feelings through the production of short creative texts  

and/or through performance 

Language Enhancement 

•  show a greater sensitivity to language by being able to comment on it in detail in critical  

discussions or analyses 

•  show a greater command of the phonology of English by being able to discuss how sound  
patterns  are  used  to  enhance  literary  effect,  and  to  apply  this  knowledge  in  their  own 

creative work 

•  gain an improved and deepened vocabulary and understanding of grammar by means of  
wide-ranging  reading  and  viewing,  and  apply  some  of  the  literary  language  they  have 

learned appropriately in critical and creative writing 

12 

 

 
 

 

 

Chapter 3         Curriculum Planning 

This  chapter  provides  guidelines  to  help  schools  and  teachers  to  develop  a  flexible  and 

balanced  curriculum  that  suits  the  needs,  interests  and  abilities  of  their  students  and  the 

context of their school, in accordance with the central framework provided in Chapter 2. 

3.1    Guiding Principles 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

The  Literature  in  English  curriculum  allows  for  flexibility  and  innovation  in  curriculum 

planning.  The  choice  as  to  which  skills  and  areas  of  the  curriculum  to  highlight,  and  the 

freedom  to  choose  very  different  types  of  text,  allow  for  considerable  diversity  in  the 

planning  and  development  of  school-based  curricula  tailored  to  different  situations  and 

groups of learners. When planning and developing their own Literature in English  curricula, 

schools and teachers are encouraged to: 

 
 
•  aim  for  a  balanced  and  comprehensive  coverage  of  the  learning  targets  and  objectives, 
ensuring  that  the  learning  activities  offered  to  learners  help  them  to  develop  equally  in 

terms of Knowledge of Literary Forms and Conventions, Appreciation and Response, and 

Language  Enhancement,  rather  than  focus  on  any  one  of  these  strands  at  the  expense  of 

the others; 

•  plan  and  devise  appropriate  and  stimulating  learning  materials,  activities,  tasks  and 
projects  to  develop  learners’  literary  skills,  creativity,  language  proficiency,  critical 

thinking  skills,  strategies  for  learning  how  to  learn,  and  positive  values  and  attitudes 

conducive to lifelong learning; 

•  set  and  work  on  clear  and  manageable  goals  or  focuses  (e.g.  aesthetic  enjoyment, 
enhanced reading skills and improved communication skills) for those taking the subject 

at different levels over a specific period; 

•  work  closely  together  as  a  team  to  plan  the  literature  curriculum,  to  develop  suitable 
learning  materials  and  activities,  and  collaborate  with  teachers  of  other  KLAs  on 

cross-curricular projects; 

find literary texts of interest and value to learners; 

• 
•  make flexible use of classroom time to facilitate discussion and self-expression, and allow 

learners to do research and work on projects; 

•  collect  and  reflect  on  evidence  of  effective  learning  and  teaching  to  inform  curriculum 

development; 

•  make extensive use of formative assessment (drafts, projects, creative work and portfolios) 

to inform learning and teaching, and avoid over-reliance on formal tests; and 

•  review  and  plan  the  curriculum  flexibly  and  make  appropriate  re-adjustments  where 
necessary,  taking  into  account  the  School-based  Assessment  (SBA)  implementation 

arrangements as specified in Chapter 5 – Assessment. 

 

13 

3.2    Central Curriculum and School-based Curriculum Development 

 
 

This  C&A  Guide  sets  the  general  direction  for  the  learning  and  teaching  of  Literature  in 

English  from  S4  to  S6.  It  provides  a  flexible  framework,  supportive  of  the  following  key 

learning elements that schools are encouraged to  include in their curriculum to help learners 

to achieve the goal of lifelong aesthetic enjoyment of literary texts and lifelong enhancement 

of language skills: 

 
 
•  subject  knowledge  and  skills,  as  embodied  in  the  learning  targets  in  the  Strands  of 
Knowledge  of  Literary  Forms  and  Conventions,  Appreciation  and  Response,  and 

Language Enhancement; 

•  generic skills; and 
•  positive values and attitudes. 
 
 

Schools are encouraged to promote the study of Literature in English and do so in such a way 

as  to  stimulate  creativity,  and  to  make  use  of  formative  assessment  to  provide  timely 

feedback  which  can  be  used  to  assist  learners  and  improve  teaching  strategies  and  text 

choices. 

Given  the  wide  scope  of  the  subject,  the  number  of  different  possible  focuses  (e.g.  thematic 

or  stylistic)  and  the  huge  range  of  texts,  covering  centuries  and  continents,  schools  have 

plenty  of  scope  for  choice,  including  trying  out  innovative  curriculum  practices  and 

experimenting  with  different  approaches  to  the  teaching  of  literature.  Literature  in  English 

can also be adapted and used in the promotion of other larger goals. It could, for example, be 

part of a drive to encourage reading, develop creativity or improve English proficiency.  It is 

hoped  that  Literature  in  English  will  not  be  seen  as  a  difficult  body  of  knowledge,  or  an 

arcane skill, but as a means of providing direct engagement with language, symbol and story 

in  order  to  explore  the  world  and  humanity  with  their  infinite  possibilities,  and  as  a  way  of 

enriching our lives. 

3.3    Curriculum Planning Strategies 

3.3.1   Integrating Classroom Learning and Independent Learning 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

Learning is most effective when learners play an active role in the learning process and take 

charge of their own learning. To encourage learner autonomy, teachers should: 

 
 
•  give learners choices about what to read, watch and write as part of the course; 
•  encourage learners to bring texts to the classroom to share; 
• 
•  allow  learners  to  express  their  likes  and  dislikes,  teaching  them  how  to  articulate  these 

respect learners’ wishes in relation to project work; 

 

14 

sensibly; 

•  encourage self-assessment and peer feedback; and 
•  encourage self-expression. 
 
 

3.3.2   Maximising Learning Opportunities 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

Learning should not be confined to the classroom. To maximise opportunities for pleasurable 

and meaningful learning, schools can: 

•  encourage wide reading; 
•  arrange visits to libraries; 
• 
• 

invite writers to give talks; 

take learners to the cinema; 

•  arrange visits to the theatre; 

•  stage plays; 
•  subscribe to film magazines; 
•  participate in Speech Festivals; and 
• 

join  workshops  on  poetry,  drama,  etc.  conducted  by 
organisations. 

relevant 

3.3.3   Catering for Learner Diversity 

All learners have ever-improving capabilities to learn and perform to the best of their abilities. 

In  planning  for  the  Literature  in  English  curriculum,  schools  should  be  sensitive  to  different 

learners’ needs and make use of strategies that will enable them to learn better and fulfil their 

potential.  Schools  may  consider  using  a  variety  of  learning  materials,  activities  and 

instructional/grouping  arrangements,  and  appropriately  adapting  the  curriculum  to  suit  their 

learners’  needs,  interests  and  abilities.  For  more  details  about  catering  for  learner  diversity, 

please refer to section 4.6. 

3.3.4   Cross-curricular Planning 

The senior secondary Literature in English curriculum recognises the value and importance of 

encouraging a cross-curricular approach to the study of the subject, as detailed in section 1.5 

“Cross-curricular Links”. To develop cross-curricular learning modules, teachers can: 

 
•  collaborate  with  teachers  of  other  KLAs  to  set  realistic  goals  and  draw  up  a  plan  or 
schedule  of  work,  and  to  develop  and  evaluate  the  learning,  teaching  and  assessment 

materials and activities; 

•  provide  learners  with  opportunities  to  develop  a  broad  range  of  generic  skills  that  they 

can apply in other KLAs, such as study skills and critical thinking skills; and 

reinforce  students’ learning  experiences  by  encouraging  them  to  read  about  and  discuss 

15 

• 

 

topics   they   are   working   on   in   other   KLAs   as   part   of  their   Literature   in   English 

programme. 

See also section 3.4.2 “Collaboration with Other KLAs”. 

3.3.5   Building a Learning Community 

Teachers  should  help  establish  a  learning  community  where  teachers  and  learners  work  and 

learn  together.  Through  maintaining  a  close  and  informal  relationship  with  the  students, 

displaying  a  personal  interest  and  a  caring  attitude,  teachers  foster  a  trusting  environment 

conducive to the free exchange of ideas – one in which learners actively engage in learning, 

participation,      collaboration,      knowledge-building,      problem-solving      and      shared 

decision-making. 

3.3.6   Flexible Class Organisation 

Teachers  should  exercise  flexibility  in  organising  the  class  for  different  learning  activities. 

Depending on their nature and purpose, learning and teaching activities can be carried out in 

groups of varying sizes. It is preferable to have a flexible space for learners to discuss points 

and  share  texts  in  small  groups,  research  from  books  and  the  Internet,  hold  individual  or 

group  conferences  with  the  teacher  on  their  latest  projects,  work  on  designs  for  plays,  etc. 

Some  learners  might  work  outside  the  classroom  space,  rehearsing  scenes,  practising 

recitations  or  filming.  Where  possible,  literature  lessons  should  be  timetabled  in  special 

rooms using the range of resources and staff available to facilitate collaborative learning and 

the sharing of ideas among more people. 

3.3.7   Flexible Use of Learning Time 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

As  mentioned  in  Chapter  2,  schools  can  allocate    about  250  hours  of  the  lesson  time  to 

Literature  in  English  at  the  senior  secondary  level.  In  addition  to  the  time  allocated  for 

instructional  lectures,  discussions,  group  work,  etc.  to  be  conducted  with  the  teacher  and 

learners together, a significant amount of studying and learning should also take place outside 

the  classroom,  e.g.  reading  texts,  viewing  films,  and  undertaking  course  work  and  other 

activities.  Schools  are  strongly  encouraged  to  make  flexible  use  of  the  learning  time  during 

and outside school hours to facilitate learning and teaching. Schools can: 

 
 
•  arrange  for  double  periods  per  week  or  cycle  to  allow  continuous  stretches  of  time  for 

learning and assessment tasks, including those for SBA, discussions, projects, etc.; 

• 

in addition to the regular Literature in English lessons, set aside a short, regular period of 

time per day for reading to help learners to develop lifelong reading skills; and 

 

16 

•  plan   their   timetables   and   school   calendars   flexibly   (e.g.   adjust   the   number   and 
arrangement  of lessons in  each term  to  cater for  the special  requirements of the learning 

programmes, and explore the use of after-school hours or holidays to encourage life-wide 

learning, such as watching a stage performance). 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

3.4    Collaboration  within  the  English  Language  Education  KLA  and 

Cross KLA Links 

3.4.1   Collaboration within the English Language Education KLA 

It  is  desirable that the teachers of English  Language  and  Literature in  English are  kept fully 

aware of what each other is doing to avoid duplication of effort and enable students to make 

use of what they have learned in one class to support their learning in another. For example, 

work  on  rhyme  might  occur  at  the  same  time  as  work  on  the  language  of  advertising  in  the 

English  lessons.  Ideas  and  materials  from  literature  classes  can  also  be  used  in  the  English 

curriculum for those who are not studying Literature in English. The boundaries between the 

two subjects are porous. 

3.4.2   Collaboration with Other KLAs 

There  are  ample  opportunities  for  co-operation  with  other  subjects,  which  teachers  are 

encouraged to explore. For instance, many of the literary techniques in Literature in  English 

are transferable to the study of Chinese Language and Literature, and knowledge gained from 

the study of drama and film will facilitate the learning of filming and theatre arts in Applied 

Learning,  as  well  as  the  discussion  and  critique  of  artworks  in  Visual  Arts.  Also,  works  of 

literature  that  relate  to  the  topics  being  covered  in  the  History  classroom  can  easily  be 

selected. 

Literature may not mesh well with the technical side of the sciences, but there is a great body 

of work on the lives of scientists, achievement in science and the moral dilemmas presented 

by scientific work that can be exploited for critical analysis and interpretation (e.g. the films 

Good  Will  Hunting,  directed  by  G.  van  Sant,  1997;  Gattaca,  directed  by  A.  Niccol,  1997; 

October Sky, directed by J. Johnston, 1999; A Beautiful Mind, directed by R. Howard, 2001; 

Proof, directed by J. Madden, 2005 and Aldous Huxley’s novel Brave New World). 

3.5    Progression 

Generally  speaking,  equal  emphasis  should  be  placed  on  the  genres  of  prose,  poetry,  drama 

and film, and sufficient time should be allocated for developing skills in critical appreciation 

and for initiating personal responses from learners. 

17 

In  accordance  with  the  recommendation  in  the  Senior  Secondary  Curriculum  Guide  (2007) 

that  the  curriculum  should  be  designed  to  help  learners  to  progress  smoothly  through  the 

three  years  of  senior  secondary  education,  a  teaching  schedule  is  proposed  below.  In  S4, 

learners  are  introduced  to  the  literary  forms  of  short  story,  poetry  and  drama  through 

examining selected set texts from each of these genres. In S5, while learners may continue to 

explore  some  of  these  forms,  they  will  also  start  reading  the  set  novel  and  working  on  the 

portfolio,  as  well  as  doing  literary  appreciation  of  both  seen  and  unseen  passages  of  prose, 

poetry  and  drama.  In  S6,  learners  will  continue  examining  the  set  texts  they  have  not  yet 

completed  in  S5.  They  will  also  view  the  set  film  in  addition  to  doing  literary  appreciation 

and portfolio work. 

 

 

Year 

S4 

S5 

Contents 

Set texts from short stories, poetry and drama 

Set poems, short stories and novel, literary 

appreciation and portfolio 

Approximate 

Number of Hours 

95 

95 

S6 

Set novel and film, literary appreciation and portfolio 

60  

The  suggested  schedule  is  developed  on  the  basis  that  learners  are  first  introduced  to  the 

literary genres they are more familiar with (i.e. those which they have been exposed to at the 

junior secondary level, such as the short story, poetry and drama). Progressively they examine 

the “relatively less familiar” genres (such as film) and take on the demanding tasks of literary 

appreciation  and  portfolio  work.  However,  the  schedule  must  not  be  interpreted  as  laying 

down hard-and-fast rules to be rigidly  followed.  Important factors such as  learners’ interests 

and  abilities,  and  teachers’  preferences  and  priorities,  should  be  taken  into  consideration  in 

working out the most appropriate arrangement for individual schools. 

3.6    Managing the Curriculum 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

To  manage  the  Literature  in  English  curriculum  effectively,  the  school  head,  the  panel 

chairperson and the teachers of Literature in English need to collaborate. When doing so, they 

are encouraged to remember the importance of: 

 
 
•  keeping   abreast   of   the   developments   and   innovations   in   the   Literature   in  English 

curriculum,  and  aligning  learning  in  Literature  in  English  with  the  school  vision  and 

culture and the central curriculum framework; 

•  developing  a  school  policy  for  Literature  in  English  in  response  to  learners’  needs  and 

interests; 

 

18 

•  encouraging  team-building  and  collaboration  between  teachers  of  Literature  in  English, 

and between teachers of Literature in English and teachers of English Language and other 

KLAs; 

•  creating time for professional development; 
•  promoting flexible deployment and use of resources; and 

•  encouraging assessment for learning and using evidence to make informed changes to the 

curriculum. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

School  heads,  panel  chairpersons  and  teachers  all  share  the  responsibility  of  initiating 

appropriate curriculum changes, and their roles as curriculum leaders may vary depending on 

the school context. Below are some of the key roles they may play. 

School Heads 

School heads take the leading role in encouraging and supporting school-based Literature in 

English curriculum development. They need to: 

 
 
•  appreciate the need for adopting the subject and recognise its potential for broadening and 

improving the educational experience of learners; 

•  help teachers involved to get suitable professional development; 
•  deploy  school  resources  appropriately  (such  as  allowing  use  of  special  rooms)  and 

encourage a flexible style of teaching; and 

•  create a school atmosphere in which creative self-expression is valued highly. 
 
 

Panel Chairpersons 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Sometimes  Literature  in  English  has  a  small  independent  panel,  in  which  case  the  panel 

chairperson needs to: 

•  choose suitable set texts; 
•  make curriculum decisions to ensure learners benefit from the subject; 
•  ensure that the school has a good selection of texts and reference materials; 
•  consider how the subject should best be timetabled; 
•  encourage literary activities in the school at large; and 
•  collaborate with the chairpersons of other panels. 

If  Literature  in  English  is  part  of  the  English  Panel,  the  chairperson  needs  to  do  all  of  the 

above and  also ensure that the foundations are laid at the junior secondary  level to pave the 

way for the study of the subject at the senior secondary level. 

19 

Teachers 

 
 

Literature teachers need to: 

 
 
•  attend professional development programmes on the subject; 
•  adapt materials and teaching style to the ability of the learners; 
•  show learners the aspects of texts which literary critics look at, and the terms they use to 

describe and discuss them; 

 lead/facilitate discussions on texts; 

 be a sensitive recipient of creative work and ideas, praising achievement and pointing to 

ways to improve areas of weakness; 

 be enthusiastic about writing and film and disseminate that enthusiasm; 

 introduce learners to a wide variety of texts and set guided questions on them; 

 ensure that the learners know and understand the set texts well; 

 see learners individually to discuss project work in detail and suggest how drafts can be 

improved; and 

 listen as much as question and instruct. 

• 
• 

• 
• 
• 
• 

• 
 
 

For  details  about  the  role  of  teachers  as  the  key  change  agents,  please  refer  to  the  Senior 

Secondary Curriculum Guide (2007). 

 

20 

Chapter 4      Learning and Teaching 

This  chapter  provides  guidelines  for  effective  learning  and  teaching  of  the  Literature  in 

English  curriculum.  It  is  to  be  read  in  conjunction  with  Booklet  3  in  the  Senior  Secondary 

Curriculum Guide (2007) which provides the basis for the suggestions set out below. 

4.1    Knowledge and Learning 

Widely  different  views  are  held  on  the  teaching  of  literature.  For  example,  while  some 

espouse  the  “structural”  approach  focussing  on  close  analysis  of  literary  texts,  others  argue 

that  the  “reader  response”  approach  aimed  at  contributing  to  the  learners’  personal 

development should be encouraged. Over the years, these and other approaches have brought 

together  a  wealth  of  insights  into  the  study  of  literature.  However,  different  though  these 

approaches  may  be,  they  need  not  be  incompatible  or  mutually  exclusive.  They  can  in  fact 

be complementary. For example, structural analysis provides the terms and concepts that help 

learners  to  interpret  and  discuss  literature,  while  a  reader  response  approach  emphasises  the 

integrated  experience  an  individual  has  with  a  text,  with  his  or  her  response  given  primacy 

over formal analysis. 

No  one  single  approach  to  the  study  of  literature  is  fully  capable  of  developing  learners’ 

capacity to understand, appreciate and enjoy literary works. The teaching of literature should 

therefore  involve  not  only  the  transmission  of  knowledge  about  literary  texts  but,  more 

importantly,  the  development  of  learners’  faculties  for  enjoying  and  appreciating  literature 

critically. Reading and viewing literature becomes a genuine part of their learning experience 

when  learners  ask  themselves  questions  about  texts  and  attempt  to  come  up  with  answers 

themselves.  It  is  only  when  learners  develop  the  ability  to  read  critically  and  independently 

that  they  select  and  appreciate  literature  outside  the  classroom,  and  are  able  to  develop  a 

lifelong  interest  in  reading.  The  emphasis  in  teaching  literature  should  therefore  be  on 

providing  learners  with  opportunities  that  will  help  them  to  develop  the  ability  to  both 

respond sensitively to texts with enjoyment and analyse them critically. 

Based  on  this  integrative  view  of  literature  study,  the  detailed  learning  and  teaching 

suggestions  provided  in  this  chapter  seek  to  help  learners  to  develop  the  skills  of  critical 

understanding and appreciation, and approach literary texts in the following genres: 

•  Prose fiction (the short story and novel); 
•  Poetry; 
•  Drama; and 
•  Film. 

21 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Highlighted   below   are   the   important   roles   that   the   teacher   and   the   learners   play   in 

contributing to the effective study of literature: 

 
 

 
 

Roles of teachers 

Apart  from  being  transmitters  of  knowledge,  teachers  play  the  key  role  of  facilitating 

learners’ study of Literature in English and enhancing their independent learning capabilities. 

To enable learners to enjoy and appreciate literary texts and develop their capacity for critical 

thinking, creativity and self-expression, teachers are encouraged to: 

 
 
•  negotiate learning goals and content with learners; 
•  maintain  a  positive  and harmonious  learning  atmosphere  which  supports  learners’ active 

participation and expression of views and ideas; 

•  act as a role model as a learner of literature; 
•  adapt teaching to learner responses; 
•  enhance quality interaction in the classroom; 
•  provide appropriate scaffolding and quality feedback; and 
•  promote self-access learning. 
 
 

Roles of learners 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Literary criticism is more an ability to be developed than a body of knowledge to be taken in. 

The  teacher  is  there  to  demonstrate  this  ability  and  to  provide  support  and  feedback,  while 

learners  need  to  read  and  view  texts  themselves  and  ensure  that  they  learn  how  to  discuss 

them  critically.  They  should  then  exercise  their  imagination,  respond  with  emotion  and 

produce their own texts. For clear explanations of opinions and ideas in group work, a critical 

vocabulary  has  to  be  developed  and,  while  criticising  texts,  learners  need  to  be  truthful  and 

respectful and be ready to share their own original writing as well as that written by others. 

4.2    Guiding Principles 

The  guiding  principles  for  the  learning  and  teaching  of  Literature  in  English  are  set  out 

below: 

 
 
•  An  interactive  process  of  literary  knowledge  building  and  development:  The  study 

of  Literature  in  English  is  a  dynamic  process  in  which  the  learner  plays  a  key  role  in 

understanding  and   internalising  the  literary   knowledge  they  have  learned,  and  in 

critically  applying  it  together  with  their  world  knowledge  in  interpreting  texts.  Any 

learning  and  teaching  approaches  or  strategies  that  teachers  are  planning  to  adopt  or 

 

22 

develop  should  be  rooted  in  this  understanding,  providing  learners  with  a  diversity  of 

learning  contexts  and  activities  to  enable  them  to  explore,  develop  and  apply  their 

literary knowledge and skills. 

 
 
•  An open and flexible curriculum framework: Schools should make use of the open and 

flexible  central  Literature  in  English  curriculum  framework  to  develop  appropriate 

learning, teaching and assessment tasks and activities. 

 
 
•  Building  on  strengths:  Schools  should  build  on  the  strengths  of  their  existing  practices 

(e.g.  the  teaching  of  language  arts  in  the  subject  of  English  Language  at  the junior 

secondary  level)  to  allow  for  a  smooth  transition  to  the  senior  secondary  Literature  in 

English curriculum. 

 
 
• 

 Understanding  learning  targets:  To  ensure  that  students  learn  effectively  and    

meaningfully, there must be a plan for them to  work towards specific learning targets  in 

and  across  the  three  Strands  –  Knowledge  of  Literary  Forms  and  Conventions, 

Appreciation 

and    Response,    and    Language    Enhancement.    The    design    and 

implementation  of  the  school-based  Literature  in  English  curriculum  should  be  geared 

towards helping learners to achieve the learning targets. 

 

 
•  Using  a  wide  range  of  learning  and  teaching  approaches  and  strategies:  Helping 

learners  to  achieve  the  learning  targets  calls  for  the  effective  and  flexible  use  of  a  wide 

range  of  approaches  and  strategies.  Depending  on  the  learning  context,  teachers  should 

design, choose and use approaches and strategies that motivate learners, and enhance their 

personal and intellectual development. 

 
 

•  Catering  for  learner  diversity:  Plenty  of  opportunities  should  be  provided  to  enable 

learners  to  enjoy  literature,  and  to  develop  their  capacity  for  critical  thinking,  creativity 

and  sensitivity  to  language  through  a  variety  of  texts  and  activities  which  cater  for  their 

diverse  needs  and  interests,  as  well  as  preparing  them  for  further  academic  study, 

vocational training or work. 

 
 
•  Flexible  use  of  resources:  Schools  are  encouraged  to  enhance  learning  in  Literature  in 

English,    sustain    learners’    interest    and    broaden    their    learning    experiences    through 

flexible    use    of    a    variety    of    resources,    both    print    and    non-print.    Also,    relevant 

community  resources  should  be  tapped  to  provide  learners  with  opportunities  for 

life-wide learning. 

 

23 

4.3    Approaches and Strategies 

As  suggested  in  the  Senior  Secondary  Curriculum  Guide  (2007),  an  extensive  range  of 

learning  and  teaching  approaches  should  be  employed  to  suit  the  content  and  focuses  of 

learning and learners’ diverse needs. 

Building on strengths in learning and teaching 

The  following  section  highlights  some  of  the  major  strengths  in  learning  and  teaching  in 

Hong  Kong  classrooms.  Teachers  are  encouraged  to  further  develop  them  to  learners’ 

advantage: 

•  Repetitive    learning    to    consolidate    knowledge:    Repetitive    learning   should   be 

distinguished  from  rote-learning,  the  latter  of  which  often  involves  memorising  without 

understanding.  Repetitive  learning  implies  continuous  learning  with  increasing  variation, 

which  ensures  retention  and  leads  to  enhanced  understanding.  Hong  Kong  learners  are 

accustomed  to  this  mode  of  learning,  and  teachers  should  capitalise  on  its  strength,  by 

encouraging reading  and re-reading  to  gain  new  insights  and to  increase  familiarity  with 

key lines, important scenes and essential plot details, so that learners can readily cite them 

to support their arguments where appropriate. 

•  Motivated  learners: Most Hong Kong learners are motivated, co-operative, diligent and 

committed to the study of the subject. Appropriate learning materials and activities should 

be  provided  to  maintain  their  interest  and  drive.  However,  teachers  should  also  make 

effective use of these traits to develop learners’ potential by devising challenging tasks or 

projects  which  promote  independent  critical  judgement  and  a  lifelong  interest  in  reading 

and viewing. 

•  Conscientious  teachers:  Teachers  of  literature  in  Hong  Kong  are  keen,  resourceful  and 

conscientious professionals, with a firm knowledge of both the subject and their learners’ 

interests  and  abilities.  While  they  should  certainly  continue  to  be  proficient  managers  of 

class  activities  and  disseminators  of  literary  knowledge,  they  should  also  enhance  their 

role   as   facilitators   by   promoting   critical   debate   and   discussion,   encouraging   free 

expression of personal responses, and offering guidance, support and timely feedback for 

the benefit of the learners. 

In  choosing  suitable  learning  and  teaching  approaches,  teachers  should  be  mindful  that 

learners may benefit from different ways of teaching, such as: 

•  Teaching   as   direct   instruction:   This   is   relevant   to   contexts   where   explanation, 

demonstration  or  modelling  is  required  to  enable  learners  to  gain  knowledge  and 

understanding  of  specific  aspects  of  the  subject,  e.g.  literary  terms  and  concepts,  and 

24 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

particular writing styles. 

•  Teaching  as  inquiry:  This  engages  learners  in  activities  where  they  are  required  to 

exercise  their  critical  abilities  and  creativity  to  examine  and  discuss  matters  such  as 

themes, characters, events and technique and style, and to communicate ideas, views and 

feelings appropriately and convincingly. 

•      Teaching as co-construction: This view focusses on the class as a community of learners. 

The  teacher  facilitates  the  setting  up  of  class  networks  in  which  learners  contribute 

collectively to the creation of knowledge and build up criteria for judging it. This is most 

obvious  in  activities  (e.g.  projects)  in  which  members  of  the  class  negotiate  areas  of 

literary  study  with  the  teacher  and  then  work  collaboratively  to  conduct  research  and 

make  presentations  on  topics  of  interest  to  them.  In  the  process,  the  learners  are 

encouraged  to  contribute,  apply  their  literary  knowledge  and  skills,  and  tap  the  rich 

sources of literature in the world. 

The suggested learning and teaching approaches or strategies set out in sections 4.3.1 – 4.3.4 

below  seek  to  cater  for  these  various  modes  of learning,  and teachers  are  encouraged  to  use 

them,  where  appropriate.  Each  section  focusses  on  a  literary  genre,  and  a  list  of  commonly 

used  literary  terms  or  concepts  which  teachers  are  likely  to  employ  in  teaching  the  genre  is 

also included. However, it is not possible to list all the terms teachers and learners may want 

to  use  when  discussing  literary  works  and  films,  nor  are  the  terms  given  here  meant  to  be 

compulsory.  Different  texts  have  different  salient  features,  and  terms  that  are  appropriate  in 

one  context  may  be  unhelpful  in  another.  The  guidelines  are  therefore  to  be  used  flexibly. 

They seek to assist, not to prescribe. 

4.3.1   Prose Fiction (the short story and novel) 

Features of prose fiction 

Underlying most of the literary works that learners will study is the “story”, and teachers may 

wish to begin the course by asking learners to think about what makes a “story” – whether it 

is something we tell a friend hurriedly in the morning or a multi-volumed work such as J.R.R. 

Tolkien’s  The  Lord  of  the  Rings,  or  even  the  history  of  the  world.  We  are  a  story-telling 

species. From  early on in our lives we are  eager  for stories, and it is almost regarded  as the 

natural duty of a child’s care-giver to supply stories. Later on in life, almost everyone retains 

a desire to hear stories; they are the basis of conversation, the selling point of magazines and 

newspapers and the content of popular soap operas. 

What, then, are the basics of a story? We need a place where the story happens, some people 

or animals who do something and some idea as to why the story matters. Extra details such as 

time or description are helpful, but not essential. 

25 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

“A stone lay on the ground for a century” is not, on its own, a story: there is 

no action and stones do not normally interest us very much. 

“A  man  ate  his  breakfast  this  morning”  on  its  own  is  not  a  story.  It  seems 

pointless. 

“A girl smiled at me on the bus this morning” reaches the level of the story 

and  will  gain  meaning  from  its  context.  It  might  mean  “So  you  see  people 

are  pleasant”,  or  “So  you  see  I  am  attractive”,  or  “The  worst  is  over  now  – 

people have started smiling again….” 

Once  the  learners  have  the  basic  concepts,  they  can  be  introduced  to  literary  terms  and  told 

that a story has action/plot, characters, settings and themes. These are ideas they will keep on 

meeting  during  the  course  as  they  see  how  different  story-tellers  tell  different  stories  for 

different purposes. 

A further point of entry to literary studies is the fact that we are also a symbol-using species. 

Colours  represent  things  for  us,  we  have  flags,  we  wear  school  uniforms  and  badges,  logos 

are all around us – and, of course, above all else we use the symbolic system of language. It is 

natural for us to use symbols to express our thoughts, e.g. Life is like a journey; God is a king, 

a shepherd, our Father; you can feel as hungry as a wolf; an angry man might roar at  you; if 

we  are  truly  enjoying  ourselves,  time  flies  by.  We  hardly  notice  all  the  symbols  we  use.  In 

literature  we  are  more  conscious  of  the  medium  we  are  using  (words  or  pictures  on  the 

screen)  –  so  we  have  developed  a  special  vocabulary  to  talk  about  symbols,  images, 

metaphors and other figures of speech. 

Stories  and  symbols  lie  behind  much  of  what  follows,  where  they  are  considered  more 

technically, in more detail and in relation to slightly different types of texts. 

The categories below can be overlapping, but will help teachers and learners to focus on the 

main features of prose fiction in the English tradition. 

AUTHOR 

 The Literature in English course is not intended to be  a historical one, 
and not every text chosen is regarded to be a masterpiece. Frequently it 
is perfectly possible to study a story without detailed information about 
its  writer.  The  relationship  between  a  writer’s  experience  and  his/her 
work  can  also  be  controversial.  Sometimes,  however,  biographical 
information can be useful, for example George Orwell’s life in relation 
to Animal Farm and Nineteen Eighty-Four. 

CHARACTER 

The bulk of fiction tells stories about people, and learners will want to 
study  the  characters  in  the  texts  they  read.  It  is  usual  to  discuss  their 
motivation and development (if any). Some stories (e.g. the “coming of 

26 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

age”   story,   about   a   young   person   growing   up)   are   very   much 
character-centred,  others  less  so.  Also,  there  are  “stock  characters”  in 
some  stories  (e.g.  the  foil  to  a  major  character:  Doctor  Watson  in 
relation  to  Sherlock  Holmes).  Stories  may  have  heroes/heroines  (e.g. 
Ralph  in  Lord  of  the  Flies  and  Jane  Eyre  in  Jane  Eyre)  and  villains 
(e.g.  Quilp  in  The  Old  Curiosity  Shop),  but  flawed  and  conflicted 
central figures are even more common in more sophisticated texts (e.g. 
Winston  in  Nineteen  Eighty-Four, Okonkwo  in  Things  Fall  Apart  and 
Mr.  Rochester  in  Jane  Eyre).  Readers  may  like  or  dislike  characters, 
and  judge  them  to  be  good  or  bad  –  emotional  engagement  with 
characters is one of the pleasures of reading. Characters are created by 
means  of  the  techniques  of  characterisation,  which  typically  include 
description   of   the   characters,   their   speech,   their   actions   and   the 
imagery associated with them (e.g. the rather unattractive, middle-aged 
Winston  Smith  of  Nineteen  Eighty-Four  with  his  diffident  speech, 
visits to working-class areas and varicose leg ulcer). Names can also be 
important  clues  to  character  (e.g.  heroic  Winston  allied  with  the 
ordinary Smith). 

Any  piece  of  fictional  prose  has  to  end  somewhere,  and  for  many 
readers  this  is  one  of  the  most  crucial  features  of  a  work  of  fiction. 
Some short stories exist primarily for the twist, the surprise reversal of 
expectations  at  the  end,  that  can  give  so  much  pleasure  (e.g.  the 
destruction of the valuable piece of furniture at the end of Roald Dahl’s 
“Parson’s  Pleasure”).  Many  readers  enjoy  a  sense  of  poetic  justice 
when  the  good  are  rewarded  and  the  bad  punished  (e.g.  “Parson’s 
Pleasure”).  Sometimes  readers  are  not  at  all  sure  what  is  going  to 
happen and the ending is suspenseful (e.g. will Ralph be killed in Lord 
of the Flies?). However, sometimes endings are neat and we know very 
clearly  what  happens  (e.g.  the  detective  story  in  which  the  crime  is 
solved  and  the  criminal  caught).  In  opposition  to  these  closed  endings 
are more open ones where the writer leaves questions unanswered and 
judgements unsure (e.g. many Katherine Mansfield short stories). 

These  are  two  of  the  basic  ingredients  of  stories.  An  initial  situation 
suddenly  turns  into  conflict  and  the  story  ends  when  it  is  resolved. 
Good fights evil, black fights white, police fight gangsters, young fight 
old, and so on (e.g. J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings). Often the 
heroes  and  villains  are  mirror-images  of  one  another  (Robert 
Stevenson’s  Dr  Jekyll  and  Mr  Hyde  is  an  extreme  example).  Contrast 
operates  at  many  levels  in  a  text.  For  example,  town  contrasts  with 
country,  love  with  hate,  appearance  with  reality,  sophistication  with 
naivety, and wealth with poverty. 

CLOSING 

CONFLICT and 
CONTRAST 

CULTURAL 
BACKGROUND 

The curriculum does not expect learners to spend a lot of time on this, 
though some research into the history of the Belgian Congo would, for 
example, help to illuminate Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness. 

DIALOGUE 

Some  writers  place  great  emphasis  on  dialogue  to  move  the  plot 

27 

 

 

 

 

 

forward and to assist with characterisation. Styles of speech are used as 
clues to personality. One character might swear, another be euphemistic 
and  so  on  (e.g.  Archibald’s  style  of  speech  shows  his  class  and 
mentality in P.G. Wodehouse’s “The Reverent Wooing of Archibald”). 

GENRE                 This  word  is  used  in  a  number  of  ways:  to  cover  major  categories  like 
prose  itself,  to  describe  styles,  or  to  denote  types  of  fiction,  e.g.  the 
detective   story   (itself   analysable   into   the   classical   style   and   the 
hard-boiled),  the  romance,  science-fiction,  fantasy,  the  utopian  novel, 
the  dystopian  novel,  the  historical  novel  and  so  on.  Such  genres  create 
expectations  in  readers.  Some  authors  abide  by  the  rules,  but  others 
enjoy breaking the conventions. A parody mocks a genre. 

IMAGERY                  Metaphors,  similes  and  symbols  create  a  pattern  of  allusion  around  a 
character   or   place   (e.g.   Charlotte   Bronte’s   Jane   Eyre   is   rich   in 
references  to  water,  damp,  fire  and  redness)  which  helps  build 
atmosphere.  Sometimes  such  imagery  has  become  formalised  as  in  the 
Gothic  style  with  its  castles,  darkness,  storms,  black  birds,  etc.  (e.g. 
Mary  Shelley’s  Frankenstein).  Where  an  object  maintains  its  meaning 
over the course of the story, it becomes symbolic. In William Golding’s 
Lord  of  the  Flies,  for  example,  Piggy’s  glasses  represent  civilisation, 
scientific  thought  and  rationality,  and  in  the  course  of  the  story  they 
become  broken  as  these  qualities  are  lost.  Also,  the  conch  shell  in  the 
same  book  symbolises  joint  decision-making  and  orderly  discussion 
(possibly  even  democracy),  and  it  is  smashed  as  Jack  becomes  a 
dictator.  A  similar  fate  is  met  by  the  glass  paperweight  that  comes  to 
symbolise for Winston an earlier way of life (George Orwell’s Nineteen 
Eighty-Four). 

IRONY 

MOOD 

A symbol  can  also  be  created  when  a  detail  suddenly  springs  to  life  as 
having  a  deeper  potential  meaning;  for  instance,  in  Joseph  Conrad’s 
Heart of Darkness, a native in the “grove of death” has a piece of white 
string round his neck – maybe mere decoration, or possibly the noose of 
the white man taking away his life. 

This means that something is going on beneath the surface level. Maybe 
the  narrator  does  not  mean  what  he/she  is  saying,  or  the  reader  feels 
he/she  knows  better.  Unexpected  consequences  which  are  fitting  are 
also ironic. Entire stories can be ironic in the sense that the truth is the 
reverse of the expected (e.g. in Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, the 
greatest  darkness  lies  not  in  the  Inner  Station  itself,  but  in  the  heart  of 
the supposedly civilised Kurtz). 

It  is  important  to  gauge  the  mood  of  a  story.  There  is  no  need  to  be 
moralistic  and  heavy-handed  about  humour  (e.g.  Saki’s  sarcasm  and 
Wodehouse’s farce). Some short stories exist mainly to evoke a mood or 
recall  a  feeling  (e.g.  many  stories  by  Virginia  Woolf  and  Katherine 
Mansfield). Mood is created mainly by means of description, style and 

28 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MESSAGE*  and 
THEME 

imagery. 
 
It  was  pointed  out  in  the  introduction  to  this  section  that  we  normally 
expect to be able to understand why a story has been told: one does not 
simply  say  to  someone  out  of  the  blue,  “My  sister’s  new  shoes  are 
green”. Outside some absurdist works of literature, or works of “art for 
art’s sake”, we similarly expect a story to have a message. A fable tries 
to illustrate a clear point; it is a sort of lesson. Examples of works with 
clear  messages  are  William  Golding’s  Lord  of  the  Flies  about  human 
nature, George Eliot’s Silas Marner about the nature of true wealth and 
George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four about totalitarianism. 
 
As  a  work  of  literature  becomes  more  complex,  we  start  talking  about 
its themes. Authors do not always want to tell us what to think, and we 
are free, anyway, to disagree, but the work can still stimulate us to think 
about a topic. Examples of the themes in some works (and the lists are 
not intended to be exhaustive) are as follows: 
 
- 

John  Steinbeck’s  Of  Mice  and  Men:  friendship,  prejudice,  duty, 
justice, fantasy, racism, mental disability; 

 
- 

J.R.R.  Tolkien’s  The  Lord  of  the  Rings:  loyalty,  friendship,  good 
versus  evil,  nostalgia,  respect  for  nature,  magic,  greed,  temptation, 
pride, bravery; and 

 
-     Ray  Bradbury’s  The  Veldt:  child-parent  relationships,  the  Oedipus 

Complex, technology, fantasy, anger. 

themes  rather  more 

 
It will be observed that some themes are more general (e.g. friendship), 
and  others  more  closely  tied  to  social  and  political  contexts  (e.g. 
marriage  customs  in  the  novels  of  Jane  Austen,  and  colonialism  and 
imperialism in much of the work of Rudyard Kipling). 
 
Messages  are  fairly  explicit,  and 
implicit. 
Assumptions  can  take  more  time  to  unearth.  Feminist  critics  will  want 
to  explore  what  attitudes  towards  women  are  hidden  in  a  text.  Some 
assumptions  will  no  longer  be  in  accordance  with  modern  thought.  For 
example,  Mark  Twain’s  Huckleberry  Finn  offers  many  narrative 
pleasures, has a message about not living in a state of self-delusion, and 
has plenty to say on themes such as friendship and civilisation, but it is 
hard  to  avoid  the  judgement  that  it  makes  a  lot  of  racist  assumptions, 
obviously related to its socio-political background. 
 
At this stage in their learning, learners still striving to fashion their own 
identities  and  belief  systems  will  be  especially  interested  in  exploring 
the  messages  and  themes  of  literary  works.  They  will  need  assistance 
not to simplify these, and encouragement to see that most works cover a 
variety of themes. 

* Sometimes also referred to as the moral of the story. 

29 

 
 
 

 

 

NARRATION 

OPENING 

PLOT 

SETTING 

 

 

 

 

A story can be told in many  ways, e.g. as a series of letters or a diary. 
Usually there is a narrator, possibly more than one in longer texts. One 
common  choice  is  third-person  omniscient  narration.  The  narrator 
knows  what  is  in  everyone’s  heart  and  mind  and  addresses  the  reader 
directly on occasions (e.g. the narrator in George Eliot’s Silas Marner). 
Ordinarily,  third-person  narration  involves  someone  with  a  limited 
view,  possibly  a  minor  character  in  the  story,  narrating  events  (e.g.  the 
Sherlock Holmes stories or F. Scott Fitzgerald’s The Great Gatsby). The 
third common choice is first-person narration (e.g. Daphne du Maurier’s 
Rebecca).  Readers  must  naturally  ask  themselves  how  much  they  trust 
the  narrator,  who  may  be  lying  or  simply  imperceptive.  Interior 
monologues  represent  the  thoughts  of  a  character  in  a  stream  of 
consciousness (e.g. James Thurber’s “The Secret Life of Walter Mitty”). 
The question of narrative voice is very important, as is that of narrative 
order.  Stories  are  not  always  told  in  chronological  order,  but  by  means 
of  flashbacks  and  even  flash  forwards  (e.g.  classical  detective  stories 
are  often  a  series  of  non-chronological  flashbacks  until  the  truth  is 
found). 

The first words of a work of fiction are of great importance in attracting 
the  reader’s  attention  and  arousing  his/her  expectations.  Many  stories 
begin  in  medias  res,  i.e.  in  the  middle  of  the  action.  Some  are  framed 
(for  example,  many  of  P.G.  Wodehouse’s  stories  are  told  by  old 
gentlemen   in   London   clubs).   The   writer   must   choose   what   to 
concentrate on first, perhaps mood, perhaps characterisation, or perhaps 
some other feature of the story-teller’s craft. 

Many  novels  and  short  stories  are  plot-centred.  What  happens  is  the 
main  focus.  Plots  are  sometimes  described  as  having  arcs.  A  novelist 
may seek to create a wave pattern of moments of calm interspersed with 
climaxes.  Complex  plots,  as  in  the  works  of  Charles  Dickens,  build 
slowly  until  the  denouement  (or  unwinding)  when  readers  start 
understanding  past  events  and  observing  their  final  resolution.  There 
may be sub-plots in addition to the main storyline. The plot may be full 
of  suspense  or  the  outcome  may  be  known  from  the  start  and  the 
enjoyment  lies  in  seeing  how  events  unfold.  Some  plots  have  become 
conventional  (e.g. boy  meets  girl, a  misunderstanding  pulls them apart, 
clarification  takes  place,  they  are  united;  a  young  hero  sets  out  on  a 
quest,  gains  a  special  gift/weapon,  meets  adversity,  is  tempted,  almost 
fails and finally triumphs). 

The  place  where  the  story  happens  is the  setting.  It  can  be  chosen  as  a 
plot convenience (e.g. the isolated country house of so many ghost and 
crime  stories),  as  part  of  the  style (e.g.  the  Gothic  and  the Pastoral), to 
set  the  mood  (e.g.    the    bleak    moors    of    Emily    Bronte’s    Wuthering 
Heights,  and  the  devastated  London  of  George  Orwell’s  Nineteen 
Eighty-Four),  establish  historical  period  (e.g.  George  Eliot’s  Silas 
Marner)  or  social  class  (Jane  Austen’s  novels).  In  art,  according  to  the 
pathetic  fallacy,  nature  mirrors  our  moods  (e.g.  frequent  instances  in 

30 

Charlotte Bronte’s Jane Eyre) or can be symbolic (e.g. H.E. Bates’ “The 
Waterfall”  and  Doris  Lessing’s  “Through  the  Tunnel”).  Some  writers 
(e.g. Charles Dickens and George Orwell) contrast the good countryside 
with the evil city. Opening scenes can establish the mood through setting 
(e.g. the fog in Charles Dickens’ Bleak House, and the graveyard in his 
Great  Expectations).  Setting  can  function  at  both  the  realist  and 
symbolic  level  (e.g.  the  unpredictable  river  snaking  through  the  mist 
and dense dark vegetation in Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness). 

Works  of  fiction  can  be  sorted  under  general  categories  (sometimes 
called  genres),  such  as  a  realist  (trying  to  recreate  life  as  we  live  it), 
magical  realist  (with  sudden  moments  of  the  impossible  inserted  into 
the  story,  e.g.  Toni  Morrison’s  Song  of  Solomon),  fantasy  (e.g.  J.R.R. 
Tolkien’s  The  Lord  of  the  Rings),  the  fairy  story,  the  fable,  the  Gothic 
romance,  the  pastoral  and  so  on.  Each  has  its  own  typical  style.  Some 
awareness of such categories would be helpful. 

Style in the sense of language and register needs also to be considered. 
A writer can use colloquial English (e.g. J.D. Salinger’s The Catcher in 
the  Rye),  dialect  (e.g.  parts  of  Thomas  Hardy),  formal  English  (e.g. 
Joseph  Conrad),  and  archaic  English  (e.g.  quite  a  lot  of  fantasy 
literature).  Sentences  can  be  rich  and  complex  (e.g.  Charles  Dickens), 
simple and straightforward (e.g. George Orwell) or positively terse (e.g. 
Ernest Hemingway). 
 
This  relates closely to  mood  and style. The narrator can be ironic, cool 
and  detached,  kindly,  mocking,  puzzled,  deeply  engaged  and  so  forth. 
The  work  itself  also  has  a  tone  that  may  be  different  (e.g.  Marlow  is 
perhaps  mainly  saddened  by  what  he  has  experienced  and  relates,  but 
Heart of Darkness itself can be seen as an angry book). 

At  times  the  tone  is  misjudged  and  perhaps  exaggerated.  What  is 
intended  as  serious  and  moving  becomes  unintentionally  humorous. 
This can be observed particularly in genres such as romance and horror. 
The   exaggeration   can   also   be   produced   deliberately,   and   then 
constitutes parody. 

When discussing the tone of a work, an effort is usually made to assess 
how  optimistic  or  pessimistic  it  is.  For  example,  P.G.  Wodehouse’s 
world  is  usually  a  sunny  place  of  decent,  if  rather  confused,  people; 
R.S.  Ballantyne’s  Coral  Island  is  full  of  optimism  about  what  young 
people left on a desert island could achieve; and William Golding retells 
the  story  in  his  Lord  of  the  Flies  in  a  much  darker  way.  In  J.R.R. 
Tolkien’s  The  Lord  of  the  Rings  good  prevails,  but  magic  and  glamour 
go out of the world, leaving a gentle melancholy at the end. 

31 

STYLE 

TONE        

 

 

 

 

 

Teaching suggestions for prose 

Teaching  prose  fiction  commences  perhaps  best  with  the  reading  of  short  stories.  With  the 

help of worksheets and teacher-led discussion, learners can be introduced to the concepts and 

approaches  listed  under  Features  of  prose  fiction.  They  need  to  learn  to  look  at  a  story  in 

terms of both content, arguing about the story and its characters, and form. 

Creative  writing  is  a  natural  part  of  a  literature  course.  Having  read  some  short  stories, 

learners should be encouraged to produce their own. At first many are too ambitious and try 

to make use of elaborate plots that are not suitable for a few hundred words. A short story of 

such  a  length  should  probably  aim  only  at  creating  a  mood,  introducing  a  character  or 

developing a symbol. Learners should be guided to reflect on the decisions they take in their 

writing with respect to, e.g. 

•  narrative voice; 
•  opening and closing; 
•  style; 
• 
• 

inclusion of imagery. 

techniques of characterisation; and 

In  these  ways,  learners  will  gradually  become  conscious  of  the  writer’s  craft,  and  learn  to 

appreciate good writing. They will also be able to share their writing and critique the work of 

their  classmates  sensitively.  The  advantages  of  drafting,  editing  and  polishing  will  become 

obvious, and learners will be able to build up a portfolio of creative work. 

As  the  learners  become  familiar  with  the  conventions  of  literary  study  and  the  terminology 

employed,  they  can  be  given  a  checklist  like  the  one  that  follows  to  go  through  when  they 

read a new story. 

Reading a short story: questions to consider 

1.  Who are the main characters? 
2.  How are they characterised? 
3.  How does the story open? 
4.  How does the story end? 
Is the ending open or closed? 
5. 
6.  What is the tone of the story? 
7.  What style of narration is used? 
8.  What are the themes? 
9.  Why did the writer write the story? 
10.  Are any of the names significant? 
Is there anything noteworthy about the style? 
11. 
Is the setting important? 
12. 
13.  Are there any symbols? 
14. 
15.  Did I enjoy the story? 

Is there anything I need to research? 

32 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

It  may  be  fruitful  for  learners  to  do  this  on  their  own,  and  then  compare,  discuss  and  refine 

their answers in class. 

One way in which learners can develop imaginative engagement with a text is to elaborate it 

in a variety of ways. Learners should be asked to create alternative endings, rewrite from the 

point of view of a different narrator, role-play a character justifying his/her behaviour, supply 

missing  documents  mentioned  in  passing  or  implied  in  the  story,  and  so  forth.  Some  stories 

may  be  turned  into  plays  or  film-scripts.  One  form/style/genre  can  be  transformed  into 

another. To encourage learners to  see literary texts as relevant to  their lives they can  also be 

asked to re-imagine them in contemporary Hong Kong. 

Novels obviously need more preparation and are more daunting to learners. Prior exposure to 

short stories and films will provide some of the skills and awareness necessary to appreciate a 

longer  text.  The  concepts  of  plot,  characterisation,  style  and  so  on  will  already  be  familiar. 

When  watching  films,  learners  can  be  made  aware  of  the  organisation  of  complex  stories, 

possibly  by  means  of  diagrams  which  help  them  to  note  the  progress  of  the  main  plot  and 

sub-plots,  with  their  climaxes,  romantic  episodes,  conversations,  bursts  of  action  and 

moments of grandeur. 

Such a diagram would be rather like the storyboard of a film, but need not be so detailed. For 

example,  in  drawing  up  a  plan  of  the  film  of  The  Return  of  the  King  (Jackson,  2003),  one 

would show how the film follows Frodo for a while and then switches to what is happening 

to  other  members  of  the  original  fellowship.  The  various  plots  can  be  numbered  for 

convenience, and comments made on their status at any given time. 

Plot B 

Love scene 
 
Sad leave-taking 

Plot A 

Reaches point of danger 

Danger increases 

Climax + sudden rescue 

Plot C 

The villain senses victory 

Villain killed 

The purpose is to think about how to organise a long story in such a way as to gain maximum 

impact. 

33 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

This knowledge can then be transferred to the study of a novel. Background information of a 

cultural or historical nature may be needed in the preparatory stage. 

Learners need to have read the novel before it is taught in class. If it is divided into chapters, 

the  teacher  might  give  an  analysis  of,  for  example,  the  first  two,  supplying  a  model  of  how 

the  alert  reader  should  note  salient  features  and  enter  into  the  world  of  the  novel.  Learners 

can then take it in turn to present chapters in the same way, so that all the major issues have 

in the end been covered. 

Some  classes  will  need  to  be  given  more  help  and  guidance.  Worksheets  with  cloze 

summaries of the storyline and guided questions will be necessary. For more famous works, 

study  guides  are  usually  available  and  may  prove  helpful.  Some  film  versions  of  novels  are 

extensively adapted and  may not be good introductions to them, and so are best viewed at a 

later stage. 

Once a novel has been read and discussed, learners can, as mentioned earlier, play creatively 

with the text, producing a variety of by-texts. 

The  morale  of  the  literature  class  is  of  importance  when  studying  a  novel  as  many  learners 

have  not  developed  good  reading  habits  and  may  find  the  vocabulary  challenging.  Teachers 

will  need  to  take  steps  to  counteract  potential  problems,  by  dividing  up  the  text  into 

manageable chunks and offering help in the form of chapter summaries and glossaries of any 

predictably  difficult  words.  Filmed  versions  of  novels,  where  available,  are  an  invaluable 

support. Very long works are best avoided at this stage. 

For  suggestions  on  teaching  appreciation  of  prose  fiction,  please  refer  to  section  4.3.5 

“Literary Appreciation”. 

4.3.2   Poetry 

Features of poetry 

Poetry has given enormous pleasure to men and women over the centuries. When producing 

verse, the poet is often more concerned than writers usually are with the language that he/she 

uses to express the ideas of the poem. Poetry makes use of patterned language, and learners 

of literature need to be sensitive to these patterns. Learners also need to be very aware of the 

sounds  of  language  in  poetry,  and  should  note  from  the  beginning  that  English  orthography, 

particularly in relation to vowels, is not a reliable guide to pronunciation: for example, “so”, 

“sew”  and  “sow”  all  have  the  same  sound,  while  the  vowel  of  “few”  is  different.  Thinking 

phonetically is essential to the enjoyment of poetry in English. 

The  following  terms  may  be  of  use  in  the  teaching  and appreciation  of  poetry  at  the  senior 

34 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

secondary level. Some of them may be only suited to taught set poems, and too difficult for 

learners to use confidently when writing about unseen poems. 

DICTION 

FORM/TYPE/ 
GENRE 

Diction  refers  to  the  poet’s  choice  of  words.  Words  do  not  simply 
have  meaning;  they  have  connotation,  an  atmosphere  around  them. 
Some  words  are  simple,  everyday  ones;  others  are  much  rarer  or 
bring  to  mind  special  feelings.  “I  went  up  the  big  hill”  means  the 
same as “I ascended the mighty peak”, but the style is quite different 
with respect to connotation. “Blue” is the more common word; “azure” 
sounds much richer and  stranger; and “lapis lazuli” seems positively 
exotic. When a critic assesses the diction of a poem he/she produces 
statements  such  as:  “The  diction  is  simple,  almost  childlike”,  “The 
poet uses the diction associated with accountancy to express his love”, 
or  “The  poet  considers  the  rabbit  in  different  ways  from  verse  to 
verse  switching  from  everyday  diction  to  scientific  diction,  the 
diction of cookery and strongly poetic diction. The effect is to make 
the reader reflect on our contradictory attitudes towards animals”. 

To  take  an  actual  example,  Owen  in  “Anthem  for  Doomed  Youth” 
uses  religious/church-going  diction  (and  imagery)  to  bring  out  the 
horror of battle. The content of the poem and the connotations of the 
words  are  in  stark  contrast  to  each  other  and  cause  the  reader 
discomfort, hence making the poem such a powerful one. 

These are common terms used to designate the categories into which 
literary works are grouped. There are numerous ways of categorising 
poetry.  Learners  should  be  familiar  with  the  differences  between 
rhyming  verse,  blank  verse  and  free  verse.  Some  familiarity  with 
shape/concrete  poetry,  and  various  experimental  forms  may  prove 
stimulating. The common types of poems learners can be exposed to 
are short lyrics, sonnets, ballads and possibly haikus. 

IMAGERY                This  refers  to  the  use  of  figurative  language  in  a  poem  (e.g. 
metaphors, similes, symbols, etc.). For instance, a poem about an old 
person  might  involve  leaves  falling  from  trees.  The  imagery  of 
autumn  helps  express  the  theme.  Love  poetry  is  typically  full  of 
spring, flowers and sunshine. Religious imagery is frequent  (e.g. the 
garden,  snake,  rainbow,  lamb,  cross,  etc.).  Images  may  be  single,  or 
create patterns that run throughout a poem. For example, Tennyson’s 
“Crossing  the  Bar”  uses  the  imagery  of  sailing  to  express  views  on 
death and the afterlife. 

INVERSION 

This  is  a  change  in  the  standard  word  order.  It  can  be  used  for 
emphasis  or  to  create  a  slightly  Biblical  and  solemn  atmosphere  (as 
was much more common in older English). 

I will arise and go now, and go to Innisfree, 
And a small cabin build there, of clay and wattles made; 

35 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nine bean-rows will I have there… 
[Yeats, The Lake Isle of Innisfree] 

Inversions  sometimes  make  it  easier  to  create  a  rhyme,  but  using  it 
for this reason is regarded as a weakness. Any example is, of course, 
open to debate: 

The butterfly from flower to flower 
The urchin chas’d: and when, at last 
He caught it in my lady’s bower, 
He cried, “Ha ha!” and held it fast. 
[Skipsey, The Butterfly] 

LINES 

One  of  the  things  that  make  poetry  work  is  the  tension  between 
grammar/syntax  and  the  lineation  of  the  poem.  Learners  must  try  to 
distinguish very clearly the difference between a sentence and a line. 
When a line end coincides with a sentence end, the line is said to be 
end-stopped. If the sentence runs past and over the line end, the line 
is  a  run-on  line  or  an  enjambed  line  (enjambment  being  another 
name  for  the  phenomenon).  A  sentence  may  even  run  on  from  the 
end of one verse to the beginning of another. Most lines also have a 
pause.  A  strong  pause,  breaking  the  flow  of  the  line,  can  create  a 
special effect, e.g. in Shelley’s Ozymandias. 

And on the pedestal these words appear: 
‘My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings, 
Look on my Works, ye Mighty, and despair!’ 
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay 
Of that colossal Wreck, boundless and bare 
The lone and level sands stretch far away. 

The  full-stop  and  pause  after  “remains”  signifies  the  end  of  the 
king’s power and the isolation of his broken statue; and the following 
run-on lines represent the featureless desert lying all around. 

The  lyric  “I”  may,  of  course,  represent  the  feelings  of  the  poet 
directly  –  and  in  many  cases  probably  does.  Poems,  however,  are 
works  of  art,  not  autobiographical  statements  and  frequently  poets 
invent  situations  and  speakers.  To  make  this  distinction  clear,  the 
word “persona” is used. At this level of study it is inadvisable to be 
too technical. Learners may wish to use the term, but in the interests 
of good style, overuse is not recommended. 

PERSONA 

PERSONIFICATION    This  term  has  fairly  vague  boundaries.  The  common  sense  refers to 
treating  an  abstract  concept  as  embodying  human  characteristics. 
Liberty  is  personified  in  the  famous  New  York  statue.  Talking 
animals  or  treating  animals  as  if  they  think  and  feel  like  humans  is 
sometimes  called  “personification”,  though  there  is  an  alternative 
term: to “anthropomorphise”/“anthropomorphism”. The terms should 

36 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

not  be  overused.  To  refer  to  an  animal  as  “she”  or  to  say  it  feels 
frightened  is  not  necessarily  an  example  of  personification  or 
anthropomorphism. 

REPETITION 

This  is  a  common  feature  of  poetry  mainly  used  for  emphasis,  but 
also for decoration and echo-effects. 

I love thee – I love thee! 
‘Tis all that I can say; 
It is my vision in the night, 
My dreaming in the day; 
The very echo of my heart, 
The blessing when I pray: 
I love thee – I love thee! 
Is all that I can say. 
[Hood, I Love Thee] 

RHYME 

A  huge  amount  of  poetry  in  English  rhymes,  and  a  lot  of  people 
enjoy  the  musical  effect  this  creates.  Some  poems  have  fairly 
detailed 
traditional    rhyming    patterns    (rhyming    couplets,    for 
example),  and  much  simple  lyric  follows  an  a/b/a/b  pattern.  Some 
class  time  should  be  given  to  rhyme.  Spelling  is  not  a  trustworthy 
guide  (e.g.  “Bough”  rhymes  with  “cow”,  not  with  “rough”).  Some 
poets insist on full rhymes, but others use half-rhymes. 

The sea crosses the sea, the sea has hooves, 
the power of rivers and the weir’s curves 
are moving in the wind-bent acts of waves. 
[Oswald, Sea Sonnet] 

As pronunciation  changes over the course of time, and as English is 
spoken differently in different areas, what was a good rhyme for the 
poet  may  not  work  for  the  reader.  English  has  a  great  many  vowels 
and diphthongs and the  match must be exact  for a rhyme to  occur  – 
“brick” and “break” do not rhyme (“brick” rhymes with “trick”, and 
“break”  with  “take”).  The  rhyme  can  be  a  final  vowel  on  its  own, 
that  is  an  open  syllable,  as  long  as  it  is  stressed:  “igloo”  and  “you” 
rhyme; but “slippery” and “fishy” do not (the final sound is too weak); 
or  it  can  be  a  final  vowel  with  consonant,  a  closed  syllable,  (e.g. 
“decide” and “tied”). Weak final closed syllables cannot create rhyme: 
“hoping” does not rhyme with “singing”. 

This  can  be  a  difficult  and  highly  technical  matter  with  lots  of 
complex  terms  relating  to  different  metres.  Learners  do  not  need  to 
master these. Rhythm is,  however, basic to poetry  and learners need 
to  be  shown  how  it  works.  This  is  simpler  with  traditional,  formal 
verse.  Learners  should  examine  some  examples  from  a  technical 
perspective,  counting  the  syllables  and  noticing  the  beat  (especially 
the iambic and trochaic rhythms). 

37 

RHYTHM 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The blackbird sang, the skies were clear and clean 
We bowled along a road that curved a spine … 
[Henley, At Queensferry] 

(10   syllables,   five   feet,   iambic   rhythm:   stresses   on   the   even 
numbered syllables). 

Plunged in night, I sit alone 
Eyeless on this dungeon stone… 
[Scott, Samson] 

(seven  syllables,  four  feet,  trochaic  rhythm:  stresses  on  the  odd 
numbered syllables). 

Poets use rhythm in many expressive ways, e.g. 

Break, break, break, 
On thy cold gray stones, O Sea. 
[Tennyson, Break, Break, Break] 

Apart from “on”, “thy” and possibly “O”, every word needs a strong 
stress.  The  effect  is  like  a  funeral  march,  the  heavy  monosyllables 
creating  the  slow  beats  of  a  drum.  Good  recordings  of  poetry 
available  in  the  market  and  on  the  Internet  should  help  learners  to 
appreciate  rhythm,  though  it  is  undoubtedly  difficult  for  a  second 
language  learner  and  no  great  expertise  is  to  be  expected  at  this 
stage. 

SOUND 

A number of technical terms are explained here. 

Alliteration occurs when the initial consonant sounds of words close 
together  are  repeated.  This  can  be  strengthened  by  the  use  of  the 
same  sounds  in  the  middle  of  words  or  at  their  ends.  Older  English 
poetry  is  very  heavily  alliterative  and  this  remains  one  of  the  most 
commonly used techniques. 

Oh, ye wild waves, shoreward dashing, 
What is your tale to day? 
O’er the rocks your white foam splashing, 
While the moaning wind your spray, 
Whirls heavenwards away 
In the mist. 
[Sinnett, Song of Wild Storm Waves] 

The use of “w” and “s” + consonant (sh/sp/st) is obvious, and tries to 
mimic the sound of the wind at sea. 

Assonance  (and  consonance)  is  a  term  whose  precise  usage  varies 
from   writer   to   writer.   Assonance   is   either   (i)   similarity   of 
word-internal  vowel  sounds,  or  (ii)  a  similarity  of  non-initial 
consonants. 

38 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

It  needs  stressing  again  that  this  refers  to  phonetic  similarity. 
Particular care needs to be taken in the case of vowels as the Roman 
alphabet  has  only  five  vowels,  but  English  has  many  more  vowel 
sounds. 

Examples: 
(i) similarity of vowel sounds: 

Where the sea meets the moon blanched land 
[Arnold, Dove Bench] 

The  vowels  of  “sea”  and  “meets”  are  the  same,  as  are  those  of 
“blanched” and “land”. 

(ii) similarity of consonants: 

“O where are you going?” said reader to rider 
[Auden, O Where Are You Going?] 
I found a dimpled spider fat and white 
[Frost, Design] 

Note the “d”s in the Auden example, and the “d”s and “t”s in the 
Frost excerpt. 

Consider this Tennyson example: 

Break, break, break, 
On thy cold gray stones, O Sea…. 
[Break, Break, Break] 

There is alliteration of “b”, assonance of “k”, and consonance of “o” 
in  “cold”,  “stones”  and  “O”  (the  “o”  of  “on”  is  a  different,  though 
related, shorter sound), and of “a” in “break” and “gray”. (Note also 
the way “break” evokes “ache”.) 

For  the  most  part  alliteration,  assonance  and  consonance  add  a 
musical  quality  to  the  verse.  These  devices  are  used  to  emphasise 
important  parts  of  a  poem,  rather  than  to  create  a  precise  special 
effect.  There  are,  however,  some  sound  tendencies  in  verse.  A  final 
“t”,  “d”  or  “k”  sounds  energetic,  even  harsh;  “l”  and  “r”  are  softer; 
and  an  initial  “d”  may  be  sad;  “s”  may  sound  like  water,  snakes, 
silence,  etc.;  and  short  vowels  (as  in  “miniature”  and  “tiny”)  suit 
small  things,  and  long  vowels  (as  in  “huge”)  larger  ones.  Learners 
should  try  to  see  if  they  can  relate  sound  patterns  to  the  sense,  but 
not worry if they cannot. 

For  an  example  of  beautiful  use  of  sound,  take  these  lines  from 
Keats: 

And fill all fruit with ripeness to the core; 
To swell the gourd, and plump the hazel shells, 
With a sweet kernel; to set budding more 
And still more, later flowers for the bees. 
Until they think warm days will never cease; 
For Summer has o’erbrimmed their clammy cells. 

39 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[Ode to Autumn] 

The  pattern  involves  “f”s,  “l”s,  the  vowel  sound  “or”  (all,  core, 
gourd,  more,  warm,  for,  o’er),  various  “s”  sounds  (s,  sw,  sh,  z 
[hazel/bees]),  “p”s  and  “b”s,  and  a  run  of  “m”s.  Many  of  these 
sounds involve rounding the mouth as if eating. 

Also Tennyson’s famous 

…doves in immemorial trees 
And murmuring of innumerable bees 
[The Princess] 

is  a  very  full  example  of  the  use  of  assonance  of  “m”  to  create  the 
effect of the distant humming of a cloud of bees. 

Onomatopoeia  is  when  the  sound  of  the  words  loosely  imitates  a 
natural  sound.  For  example,  “drip,  drip”  and  “plip-plop”  may  sound 
like  slowly  falling  water;  “pitter-patter”  the  sound  of  rain,  “miaou” 
the noise of a cat, and “howl” the cry of a wolf. 

This  terminology is  useful,  but  not  central.  Being sensitive to  sound 
patterns enormously enriches appreciation of poetry. 

SUITING FORM 
TO MEANING 

This  entry  sums  up  much  that  occurs  in  the  others.  The  poet  often 
tries to shape language to mirror as well as to present his/her content. 
As we have seen, this is done by means of rhythm, pause, the tension 
between  the  sentences  and  the  lines  and  by  the  selection  of  sounds. 
Here are some further examples. 

We chanced in passing by that afternoon 
To catch it in a sort of special picture 
Among tar-banded ancient cherry trees, 
Set well back from the road in rank lodged grass 
The little cottage we were speaking of, 
A front with just a door between two windows, 
Fresh painted by the shower a velvet black. 
We paused, the minister and I, to look. 
[Frost, The Black Cottage] 

 
The  “it”  in  line  2  is  not  explained  until  line  5.  The  main  subject  of 
the  sentence  is  well  set  back,  in  the  same  way  as  the  cottage  is 
physically set back and obscured. When the “we” pause, the rhythm 
pauses  as  the  pronoun’s  reference  is  given.  The  act  of  stopping  is 
expressed in a short sentence that comprises exactly a single line. 
 
In  the  second  example,  the  sentence  with  its  multiple  subordinate 
clauses winds around the lines like the creeper being described. 

Like a huge Python, winding round and round 
The rugged trunk, indented deep with scars, 
Up to its very summit near the stars, 
A creeper climbs, in whose embraces bound 

40 

 

 

 

 

 

 

No other tree could live. 
[Dutt, Our Casuarina Tree] 

Opportunities  should  be  provided  to  engage  learners  in  recognising 
such effects. 

TONE                       A reader has not commented adequately on a poem if he/she has not 
referred to its tone and said what its prevailing mood is. Often this is 
clearly stated, though the reader must be on the look out for irony. It 
is  useful  to  spend  time  thinking  about  adjectives  that  might  be  used 
to  describe    poems    and    poetic    personas,    e.g.    angry,    bitter, 
broken-hearted,  defiant,    ecstatic,    nostalgic,    puzzled,    regretful, 
resigned, sad, thoughtful. 

VERSES/STANZAS     Poems are written in lines that are often divided into verses/stanzas. 
These may  all be the same length or variable.  Poets  often set  up the 
standard  so  that  they  can  then  make  a  point  by  deviating  from  it.  A 
sudden short line or verse could, for example, signify a death. 

Teaching suggestions for poetry 

At  the  preliminary  stage,  learners  may  have  varying  degrees  of  knowledge  and  exposure  to 

verse. If this has been limited, the first aim should be to get them interested in poetry, perhaps 

by  asking  them  to  share  favourite  song  lyrics  and  through  discussion  of  connotation  (e.g. 

What do you think of when you hear the word apple/green/wolf/moon, etc.?) and symbol (e.g. 

What  would  you  draw  to  express  anger?).  Sensitivity  to  rhyme  needs  to  be  developed  by 

matching  exercises,  or  by  work  on  rhymed  poems  with  one  of  the  pairs  of  rhymes  blanked 

out. 

The  Internet  has  a  great  many  poetry  sites  and  learners  can  search  through  them  and  share 

discoveries  with  one  another.  Self-expression  through  poetry  writing  should  be  encouraged. 

Obviously,  learners  are  not  going  to  produce  perfect  sonnets,  but  they  can  experiment  with 

free verse and simplified forms, such as the haiku in English. The first draft of the poem can 

then be worked on to add sound effects, such as some alliteration. 

In  order  to  appreciate  the  sounds  of  poetry,  learners  need  oral/aural  exercises.  Schools  can 

obtain  recordings  of  poetry  and  introduce  poetry  websites  with  audio  facilities  to  learners. 

Teachers should model poems for learners and teach them to read aloud in class. Participation 

in speech festivals can be advantageous, as can choral performances. 

An  interesting  selection  of  poems  with  a  variety  of  activities  designed  to  focus  on  content, 

poetic  technique  and  self-expression  can  be  found  in  the  EMB  resource  packages  on  the 

learning and teaching of poetry. (See “References”.) 

41 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

As  well  as  discussing  some  poems  at  length,  the  class  should  read  many  others  quickly  so 

that  they  come  to  realise  the  enormous  range  of  poetry  in  English.  Different  poems  can  be 

used  to  illustrate  different  features  of  verse.  For  instance,  one  poem  might  have  a  special 

image,  another  interesting  sound  effects,  and  a  third  be  rich  in  alliteration.  Learners  may 

bring  in  poems  they  have  found  to  share  with  their  classmates,  explaining  why  the  poems 

impressed  them  emotionally  or  technically.  A  poetry  notice-board  can  provide  a  further 

opportunity  to  share,  though,  as  noted  above,  it  is  also  important  to  develop  the  habit  of 

reading poetry aloud, and oral sharing sessions have a particular value. 

The ability to write a critical analysis of a poem needs to be developed. At first, this can be 

achieved by questions which guide the reader towards special features. In relation to technical 

points, it needs to be stressed from the beginning that comment should be accompanied with 

suitable examples – not “There are many ngs and nks in verse four”, but “The many ngs and 

nks  in  verse  four  help  express  the  feeling  of  being  in  prison  and  surrounded  by  metallic 

sounds”.  There  is  no  great  point  in  referring  to  a  technique  if  one  has  nothing  much  to  say 

about it. 

Gradually,  the  learners  should  learn  to  function  without  questions  at  least  some  of  the  time 

and be able to write analyses of poems on their own. 

Set poems are probably best taught in a lecture/discussion format, though individuals can be 

given prior research tasks (e.g. Please prepare to report to the class on the story of “Daedalus 

and Icarus”.). 

For  suggestions  on  teaching  appreciation  of  poetry,  please  refer  to  section  4.3.5  “Literary 

Appreciation”. Examples of poetry analysis can also be found in Appendix 2. 

4.3.3   Drama 

Features of drama 

Where  possible,  drama  texts  should  be  approached  as  theatre  works.  Before  starting  to  read 

famous plays or a set text, learners should get used to looking at dramatic scenes, discussing 

how  dramatists  work  as  they  turn  stories  into  plays  with  themes,  and  the  conventions 

dramatists  draw  upon.  Obviously,  theatrical  plays  in  performance  are  extremely  artificial 

artefacts,  yet  by  the  audience’s  willingness  to  suspend  disbelief  the  illusion  works  and 

fascinates. Treating the  story of Macbeth as a true recounting of history, or as a novel, is to 

miss  an  important  dimension  of  the  play.  The  learner  of  literature  should  be  interested  not 

only in content, rich as that can be, but also in how producers of literary works create them. 

Many of the ideas and concepts referred to in the earlier sections of this document are directly 

relevant  here  also,  though  a  play  usually  lacks  a  central  narrator  and  this  gives  rise  to  a 

42 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

number of differences. A dramatist may comment by means of a prologue, epilogue or chorus, 

but this is far more limited than the interference of a narrator in a novel. 

The most famous writer in English, William Shakespeare, is likely to be encountered by most 

learners  of  literature  in  English.  The  advantages  of  this  are  that  students  can  derive  benefit 

from  the  quality  of  his  work,  its  cultural  importance,  the  vast  array  of  critical  support 

available  and  the  large  number  of  performances  in  the  theatre  or  in  recorded  form  that 

learners have a chance to be exposed to. The disadvantages are the linguistic difficulty of the 

texts, which might well and truly  frighten a second language learner, the volume of difficult 

references  in  them  and  the  multiplicity  of  critical  opinion  available  that  may  stifle  personal 

reaction. In addition to considering the plot, characters, dramatic structure and scheme of the 

play, in the case of Shakespeare, learners need to think about the verse and imagery. If asked 

to  select  a  favourite  scene,  a  learner  would  be  expected  to  comment  on  its  dramatic 

effectiveness,  ideas  and  poetry.  Learners  also  need  some  acquaintance  with  the  conditions 

and  conventions  of  the  Elizabethan  stage,  so  that  they  can  understand  the  need  of  the 

characters to  tell  us where they/we are and create atmosphere. Knowledge of the use of boy 

actors for female parts will also throw important light on many scenes. 

The following items seem appropriate for learners at the senior secondary level. 

ACT 

Plays  are  normally  divided  into  scenes  and  acts,   a  scene  being  a 
sub-division of an act. A scene is usually the action in one place at one 
time, while acts are major structural divisions of the play. The length and 
placement  of  these  create  the  dramatic  structure  and  flow  of  the  play. 
They  create  rhythm  and  pace.  After  an  intense  scene,  a  more  relaxed 
interlude  might  provide  a  useful  contrast  and  allow  the  playwright  time 
to  build up to a new climax. Scenes  may end on a “cliff-hanging” note, 
leaving the audience in suspense. Anti-climax may be used to undermine 
audience expectations or to make a thematic point. Thinking about such 
issues is part and parcel of studying a dramatic text. 

ASIDE/ 
SOLILOQUY 

Most  of  the  action  of  a  conventional  play  takes  place  through  the 
dialogue.  Interior  states  can  also  be  communicated  through  “asides”, 
brief comments by a character that would be thought rather than spoken 
in daily life, e.g. Polonius’ comment in Hamlet: 

“Though this be madness, yet there is method in’t.” 

 
and Hamlet’s remark during The Mousetrap 

“That’s wormwood.” 

 
Soliloquies  are  speeches  made  by  a  character  when  alone  and  represent 
mental  debates  and  inner  struggles.  Hamlet  is,  of  course,  also  rich  in 
these, e.g. “To be or not to be….” 

CHARACTER 

Characters  are  likely  to  be  at  the  centre  of  any  drama  that  learners 
encounter  at  this  stage  in  their  education,  and  attitudes  towards  the 

43 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

STAGING 

actions  and  viewpoints  of  the  characters  are  central  to  the  learners’ 
reaction  to  a  play.  Techniques  of  characterisation  should  also  be  noted: 
the  actions,  speech,  style  of  speech,  and  description  of  the  character,  as 
well  as  the  comments  of  other  characters  on  him/her.  Characters  may 
have  a  chance  to  give  us  a  further  insight  into  their  mental  world  by 
means  of  asides  or  soliloquies.  The  learner  of  a  particular  dramatic  text 
should ask how he/she feels about a certain character, why, and how the 
dramatist has produced that reaction. 

A play  is  a  script  that  needs  to  be  brought  alive  through  performance. 
Learners  should  discuss  what  sort  of  actors  they  would  choose  for  the 
different  roles,  styles  of  acting  they  think  suitable  for  a  play,  and  the 
costumes,  props  and  scenery  (if  any)  they  would  select  if  they  were 
directing  the  play.  Their  attention  should  be  drawn  to  such  details  as 
entrances  and  exits.  All  aspects  of  the  staging  can  come  together  to 
create  a  unified  atmosphere  (e.g.  in  Absurd  Person  Singular,  the  small 
kitchen  comes  to  symbolise  the  narrowness  of  suburban  life,  just  as  the 
references   to   lack   of   heating   in   later   scenes   reflect   emotional 
deprivation). 

Directing  a  play  entails  interpretation.  Shakespeare’s  plays  have  been 
used  to  present  a  whole  range  of  issues.  The  Merchant  of  Venice  has 
been  staged  as  a  play  about  religious  intolerance  and  race,  about 
commercial  values  and  capitalism,  about  homosexuality,  about  the 
strength  of  women,  or  simply  as  a  moving  love  story.  Learners  should 
think  about  which  interpretation  they  find  most  valid/useful/interesting. 
In  relation  to  Romeo  and  Juliet,  directors  seem  to  prefer  to  change  the 
setting  rather  than  the  interpretation  (e.g.  Bernstein’s  New  York, 
Zeffirelli’s Renaissance Italy and Luhrmann’s Los Angeles). 

SYMBOLISM 

Dramatists  may  also  avail  themselves  of  symbolism.  There  may  be 
patterns of imagery running through a text (e.g. of the graveyard in John 
Webster’s  The  Duchess  of  Malfi),  or  central  symbols  (e.g.  the  glass 
animals of Tennessee Williams’ The Glass Menagerie). 

THEME 

Plays,  even  more  than  works  of  prose  fiction,  tend  to  have  a  conscious 
message. Shaw’s Saint Joan is as much about the rise of the nation state 
and the birth of modernity as it is about the dilemma of Joan of Arc and 
the  rights  and  wrongs  of  her  treatment.  Shakespeare’s  intentions  are 
usually  more    opaque    and    his    plays    more    open    to    different 
interpretations,  but  Othello  is  certainly  about  jealousy,  even  if  male 
violence, racism, class conflict, homosexuality and so on have also been 
identified as important themes by critics. 

Teaching suggestions for drama 

It  would  be  advisable  to  take  learners  to  a  theatrical  performance  early  on  in  the  course  of 

study so that they can discuss how it worked, what decisions the director had taken and what 

44 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

alternative  approaches  might  have  worked  well.  Learners  can  be  asked  to  try  to  dramatise 

short  stories  they  have  read,  so  that  they  can  become  aware  of  the  problems  and  enter 

sympathetically into the world of the playwright. Later on in the course, learners might like to 

discuss  how  some  major  contemporary  political  story  could  be  turned  into  drama,  and  what 

themes the play based on it might contain. 

To  improve  awareness  of  how  a  character’s  lines  have  to  suit  personality,  learners  can  be 

given  a  list  of  character-types  and  asked  to  write  suitable  lines  for  them  to  be  spoken  in  a 

similar situation. For example, 

•  A poet (male) 
•  A teenage boy 
•  A lawyer (female) 
•  A rather rough sailor (male) 
•  A prince 
•  A film star (female) 

 
 
Tells  someone  who  is  likely  to 

be  surprised  by  the  news  that 

he/she  is  in  love  with  the  other 

person. 

This exercise might also lead to a discussion of stereotyping and stock characters. 

Another  exercise  would  be  to  give  learners  main  plots  for  plays  (or  ask  them  to  contribute 

these themselves and then redistribute them) and  ask them to think of suitable sub-plots that 

might complement, contrast with, offer relief from or in some way comment on the main plot. 

If a reasonably modern text is being read, it is probably good to read at least part of it aloud 

with appropriate dramatic emphasis. Everyone in class should have a chance to take part. The 

more artistically inclined can further contribute by sketching stage designs and costumes, and 

the musically  gifted might like  to think of suitable background  tunes or songs that could be 

included in the reading performance. 

Learners, especially if they are studying a complex Shakespeare play, would be well advised 

to  keep  a  journal  of  the  experience,  recording  thoughts,  interpretations,  sketches,  favourite 

quotes and actions. Watching different film versions in order to discuss diverse approaches to 

the play can help learners to realise that there is no one official reading of the text that they 

must adhere to. 

Also, dramatising brief stories found in the press can be a stimulating exercise. 

In  order  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  verse,  some  of  the  most  highly  regarded  speeches  should  be 

studied as poetry in addition to their dramatic function in the play. 

For  suggestions  on  teaching  appreciation  of  drama,  please  refer  to  section  4.3.5  “Literary 

Appreciation”. 

45 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

4.3.4   Film 

Films  are  included  for  study  because  of  the  many  characteristics  they  share  with  literary 

genres  (drama  and  prose  fiction,  in  particular)  –  for  example,  the  use  of  symbolism  and 

foreshadowing,  the  effects  of  point  of  view,  and  plot  and  theme  development.  To  these  are 

added sound and vision, which distinguishes film from the other genres and makes it a unique 

and  powerful  medium  capable  of  stimulating  learners’  senses  and  cognitive  faculties, 

enlarging  their  cultural  knowledge  and  understanding,  and  adding  variety  to  the  curriculum. 

The  choice  of  films  is  not  restricted  to  those  based  on  literary  works.  Instead,  films  are 

selected on the principles of interest, depth and literary merit. 

Aspects of film appreciation and criticism 

Teaching  film  can  be  a  joy  as  most  learners  come  to  the  subject  with  plenty  of  background 

experience and a very positive attitude towards the experience of film-watching. Film theory 

(and  literary  theory  in  general)  is  beyond  the  reach  of  learners  at  this  stage.  The  aim  is  to 

teach  the  rudiments  of  practical  criticism,  and  even  here  the  range  of  terminology  is 

enormous. Teachers and learners are encouraged to use the basic terms and those which they 

find  useful  for  the  discussion,  understanding  and  critical  estimation  of  the  films  they  study. 

The   literature   curriculum   does   not   advocate   knowledge   of   technical   terms   as   being 

meritorious in itself, or endorse the memorisation of long lists of them. 

Film is a medium that can be used in a variety of ways. Some films can be regarded as similar 

to poetry in their fascination with mood and style, but overwhelmingly films have been used 

to  tell  stories;  indeed,  an  original  screenplay  is  probably  rather  less  common  than  an 

adaptation  of  a  novel.  In  terms  of  plot,  characterisation,  etc.,  most  of  what  is  said  in  the 

sections  on  prose  fiction  and  drama  could  be  repeated  here;  and,  in  fact,  many  of  the  points 

are probably best  introduced in  the consideration of films (e.g. “story  arcs”),  given learners’ 

frequently greater familiarity with cinema than book culture. Films are usually less rich than 

books  in  the  sense  that  narrative  subtlety  is  difficult  to  achieve.  Hinting,  indirectness  and 

elusiveness are easier to achieve in prose (though occasionally films like The Sixth Sense, dir. 

M. Night Shyamalan, 1999, manage tricks of this nature). Film, however, can visually dazzle 

us,  overwhelm  us  with  information  and  appeal  in  most  cases  to  sound  as  well  as  sight.  The 

advantages and disadvantages of the different media should be something learners talk about 

frequently during the course, considering whether in fact it is wrong to think that a good book 

supplies the basis for a good film. 

As  before,  a  number  of  items  are  singled  out  for  comment  here  as  a  means  of  orienting 

teachers and learners to points they might wish to consider when discussing films. 

46 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

ACTORS*                        Many viewers choose which films to watch on the basis of which actors 
are in it. Hollywood has fostered the cult of stars, promoting them in the 
media and emphasising their looks and power by means of, for instance, 
close-up  shots,  beautiful  costumes  and  lighting.  To  add  attraction  to  a 
film,  a  star  may  even  appear  only  briefly  in  a  cameo  role.  The  normal 
Hollywood  style  of  acting  is  naturalistic  (depending,  of  course,  on  the 
genre).  Some  important  actors  (e.g.  Brando,  De  Niro)  have  adopted 
“method  acting”,  immersing  themselves  in  their  roles  and  letting  them 
temporarily take over their private lives. In addition to the stars, the cast 
contains  many  supporting  actors  and  extras.  The  British  tradition  of 
film-making  is  frequently  more  “theatrical”  with  famous  stage-actors, 
such  as  Sir  Ian  McKellen  and  Dame  Glenda  Jackson,  taking  a  rather 
different approach to their performances. Occasionally directors make a 
particular  point  of  using  non-professionals  (e.g.  A  Bronx  Tale,  dir.  De 
Niro, 1997 and In This World, dir. Winterbottom, 2003). 

DIRECTORS              Although  in  very  commercial  cinema,  the  director  is  a  rather  minor 
figure who simply delivers the desired product,  in  many  cases directors 
have  emerged  as  the  central  and  controlling  intelligence  whose  vision 
creates  and  unifies  the  film.  Directors  like  Hitchcock  have  come  to  be 
seen as major artists. Some directors have a very personal style (e.g. Tim 
Burton);  some  specialise  in  a  particular  type  of  film  (e.g.  early  Martin 
Scorsese);  and  others  have  a  wide  range,  though  common  themes  often 
emerge (e.g. Ridley Scott). 

THE FILM 
INDUSTRY 

GENRE 

One of the distinguishing characteristics of cinema is that a feature film 
involves  tremendous  effort  and  a  huge  outlay  of  money.  As  a  result, 
marketing  is  very  important  and  films  are  usually  targeted  at  particular 
sectors  of  the  population.  The  young,  especially  young  males,  are 
important  consumers  of  entertainment;  hence  the  frequency  of  action 
movies.  To  compete  with  television  and  video,  studios  have  developed 
the concept of the blockbuster, a film that really deserves to be seen on 
the  big  screen,  that  is  packed  with  special  effects,  that  everyone  talks 
about  at  the  time  of  its  release  and  that  has  many  commercial  tie-ins 
(e.g.  Titanic,  dir.  J.  Cameron,  1997;  Lord  of  the  Rings,  dir.  P.  Jackson, 
completed  2003).  Independent  filmmakers  try  to  maintain  a  more 
personal  style,  and  art-house  cinema  caters  for  the  highbrow.  Film  in 
English  is  dominated  by  Hollywood  and  the  United  States,  but  Britain, 
Australia  and  other  English-speaking  countries  produce  a  number  of 
new films each year. 

Films  can  be  categorised  in  many  ways  and  it  would  take  pages  to  list 
all  the  possible  genres.  Story  content  is  often  the  deciding  factor:  the 
Western,  the  coming-of-age  story,  the  road  movie,  the  buddy  movie, 
science  fiction,  horror  films,  ghost  stories  and  so  on.  Such  categories 
have  sub-categories:  for  instance,  the  crime  film  may  appear  as  a 
detective  story  (classical  or  hard-boiled),  a  police  film  (maybe  a  buddy 
team, e.g. Lethal Weapon, dir. R. Donner, 1987), a gangster movie (e.g. 

*  The document uses the term to refer to both males and females. 

47 

 

 

 

 

 

many  Scorsese  films),  a  bank  robbery  story,  and  a  film  focussed  on  a 
con  trick  or  con  artist  (e.g.  The  Sting,  dir.  G.R.  Hill,  1973).  Some 
categories  refer  to  audience  (e.g.  the  teen  pic).  For  some  films,  the 
emotion evoked may be central (e.g. the weepy). Others are marked by a 
general  style  and  pace  (e.g.  the  action  movie)  or  a  more  specific  style 
(e.g.  film  noir).  Biopics  are  based  on  true  life  stories.  Animation  (e.g. 
many  Disney  films)  involves  a  completely  different  way  of  making  a 
film. The categories are endless – some very loose and some with strict 
conventions  –  but  trying  to  map  the  territory  will  help  learners  in  the 
analysis of particular films. 

NARRATION           Films  may  contain  point  of  view  (POV)  shots  that  show  us  the  world 
from  a  character’s  particular  perspective,  but  it  is  hard  to  maintain  for 
long and most films only treat the camera as a neutral all-seeing narrator 
which  can  go  anywhere.  Occasionally  voiceover  is  used,  but  outside 
film  noir  the  technique  has  not  been  regarded  as  a  particularly 
satisfactory  one.  Narrative  sequence  is  frequently  disrupted  with 
flashbacks, flash-forwards, reconstructions, interviews, and cutting from 
story  to  story,  between  different  plots/sets  of  characters.  Some  films 
begin  with  all  the  characters  together  and  then  diverge  to  follow  a 
number  of  different  individuals  and  story  lines  (e.g.  The  Godfather, dir 
F.R.  Coppola,  1972);  others  follow  the  opposite  course  and  start  with 
two  or  more  stories  that  seem  unrelated,  but  gradually  converge  (The 
English  Patient,  dir  A.  Minghella,  1996).  Characterisation,  climax  and 
suspense are central as in other forms of narrative fiction. 

SOUNDTRACK  This  consists  of  the  dialogue, very  important  in most  films,  though  less 
central  in,  for  example,  a  pure  action  movie.  It  can  in  some  ways  be 
treated in the same way as a drama script, but can afford to be much less 
explicit  because  of  the  amount  of  visual  information  available  to  the 
filmgoer. Secondly, there are  diegetic sounds,  sounds that are natural  to 
the  scene  (e.g.  the  sounds  of  insects,  doors  shutting,  footsteps).  These 
can  be  emphasised  or  downplayed  by  the  sound  editor/director.  Finally, 
there  are  the  non-diegetic  sounds,  ones  that  would  not  occur  in  reality. 
This  usually  takes  the  form  of  music  and  helps  create  mood  and 
establish connections across the film. 

TECHNICAL 
ASPECTS 

As  film  is  a  visual  experience,  naturally  this  aspect  deserves  plenty  of 
attention.  Films  can  be  made  in  black-and-white  or  colour.  The  colour 
can be intense (e.g. Far From Heaven, dir. T. Haynes, 2002), or drab to 
create  a  gloomy  atmosphere  (e.g.  Alien  3,  dir.  D.  Fincher,  1992  and 
Seven, D. Fincher, 1995). Lighting also has a strong effect on the visual 
style of the  film  and is used,  for instance, to accentuate the beauty of a 
star  (e.g.  many  scenes  in  Casablanca,  dir.  M.  Curtiz,  1942).  A  film 
consists  of  a  series  of  shots.  The  length  of  shots,  created  by  cutting, 
affects the pace of the film. Digital effects are commonly used nowadays 
to  enhance  the  visual  experience  (e.g.  Gladiator,  dir.  R.  Scott,  2000). 
The  movement  of  the  camera  and  its  lens,  described  by  means  of  such 
terms  as  pan,  tracking,  crane  and  zoom,  is  important.  Slow  motion,

48 

 

 

 

 

speeded  up  motion,  freeze-frame,  and  jump-cut  are  additional  terms 
which might crop up in the analysis of a film. 

VISUAL EFFECT   A film is something we above all go to see, and great attention is given 
to  this  aspect.  It  needs  to  be  taken  as  a  general  principle  that  what  we 
see  on  the  screen  is  there  as  a  result  of  deliberate  choice  and  worth 
discussing. 

•  Set  –  Some  settings  belong  to  particular  genres  (e.g.  Death  Valley 
to westerns, the haunted house). Confined spaces can give a feeling 
of being trapped; while the open road and open countryside signify 
freedom  (the  contrast  can  be  found  in  Bonnie  and  Clyde,  dir.  A. 
Penn,  1967  and  the  Lord  of  the  Rings  trilogy,  dir.  P.  Jackson, 
completed  2003).  Details  of  decoration  can  be  used  as  part  of 
characterisation  (e.g.  the  Sikh  home  in  Bend  it  Like  Beckham,  dir. 
G.  Chadha,  2002).  Nature  can  reflect  theme  also  (e.g.  On  Golden 
Pond, dir. M. Rydell, 1981). 

•  Costume  –  One  genre  of  film  is  actually  called  the  “costume 
drama”,  historical  films  that  lavish  attention  on  the  elaborate 
clothes of the past. In The Breakfast Club (dir. J. Hughes, 1985) the 
different types of learners are indicated by their clothes. In this way 
clothes  can  be  clichéd  and  reflect  stereotypes  with  heroes  often 
wearing  lighter  clothes  than  villains.  Flamboyant  costumes  are  a 
major  source  of  characterisation  and  mood  in  The  Adventures  of 
Priscilla, Queen of the Desert (dir. S. Elliot, 1994). Teenagers may 
be drawn to films such as those featuring rap artists in order to see 
the latest street fashions. 

•  Make-up,  hair, etc. – Every effort is made to ensure stars look as 
lovely  as  possible  with  perfect  skin,  shining  eyes  and  so  on. 
Make-up  can  be important to character (e.g. Sunset Boulevard, dir. 
B.  Wilder,  1950)  and  even  central  to  the  story  (e.g.  Elizabeth [dir. 
S. Kapur, 1998], as the queen increasingly turns herself into an icon 
for the English people). Make-up plays a significant role in special 
effects also. 

•  Lighting (see “Technical aspects”). 

•  Props  –  Pairs  of  glasses  are  often,  for  example,  significant,  e.g. 
part  of  the  outfit  of  a  gangster,  a  sign  of  a  brainy  scientist  or  a 
symbol  of  shortsightedness.  In  one  famous  scene  in  On  the 
Waterfront (dir. E. Kazan, 1954) gloves become briefly an important 
symbol  of identity. The  meals  people eat  can  also  be significant.  In 
Bram  Stoker’s  Dracula  (dir.  F.F.  Coppola  1992)  a  bloody  steak  is 
consumed,  and  in  Chinatown  (dir.  R.  Polanski,  1974)    a    fish,  
fitting    in    with    a    great    deal    of    related    imagery.  Hitchcock’s 
films  are  rich  in  detail,  e.g.  the  paintings  on  the  wall  in  Psycho 
(1960).  Good  film  spectators  need  to  pay  close  attention  to

49 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

everything they are offered on the screen. 

WRITING ABOUT The  film  review  can  hardly  be  seen  as  a  very  firm  genre,  but  the  type 
published  in  newspapers  and  film  magazines  might  be  a  useful  model 
FILM 
for learners, though the style is frequently rather colloquial. The writers 
of these do not wish to spoil  the enjoyment of their readers, who might 
watch  the  movie  subsequent  to  reading  the  review,  and  consequently 
they are sparing of details of plot, especially if there are any surprises or 
twists.  A  film  analysis  is  usually  written  in  a  more  scholarly  style  and 
may well be accompanied by a synopsis of the story. Learners may also 
wish  to  keep  a  viewing  diary/journal  with  filmographical  detail, 
comments on interesting aspects and personal reactions. 

Teaching suggestions for film 

Movie quizzes, informal chats about the week’s new films, sharing of favourite films, advice 

and  Internet  sites  and  good  film  shops,  group  visits  to  the  cinema,  regular  reading  of  film 

reviews,  the  provision  of  film  magazines,  interest  in  the  Oscars  and  other  film  awards  –  all 

these  can  help  generate,  or  harness,  learners’  enthusiasm  for  film  talk  and  film  criticism. 

Teachers should not hesitate to make it clear that films are not for passive entertainment, but 

active  study.  Especially  after  the  first  viewing,  learners  are  expected  to  review  key  scenes, 

discuss and reflect on what they have been watching. 

When a particular film is to be studied in depth, learners can work in groups and each group 

can be given the task of exploring particular aspects of the film. Some groups may focus on 

the literary aspects, while others can work on the dramatic or the cinematic aspects. Learners 

might choose for themselves, or be assigned, different elements to research or study. 

Literary aspects: 
•  Narrative  (the  story/story  line,  what  the  story  line  is  based  on;  any  particular 

perspective used; narrative sequence disrupted by flashbacks or reconstructions) 

•  Characters (protagonists, villains, how characters and their action help the audience to 

gain insight into the story) 

•  Setting (where the story happens, its significance) 
•  Theme (the general subject of the film, e.g. love, rivalry, fantasy) 
•  Genre (comedy, drama, science fiction, epic, horror, suspense, a mix of different genres) 

50 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Learners may be given the following questions to work on. 

Literary aspects: questions to consider 

1.   Who are the characters in the film? 

2.   What is the film’s setting? 

3.   What are the main plot elements? 

4.   From whose point of view is the story told? 

5.   What is the theme of the film? 

6.   What is the mood of the film? 

7.   What symbols are used in the film? 

Dramatic aspects: 
•  Acting (how the actors perform) 
•  Costume (how appropriate the clothes are to the characters or the setting of the story, and 

how they contribute to the overall effect of the film) 

•  Make-up (whether the style is exaggerated or plain, and what effect is achieved)  

 

Learners may be given the following questions to work on. 

 
Dramatic aspects: questions to consider 

1.   Did the actors make you forget they were acting? How? 

2.   How important were the costumes/make-up to the success of 

the film? 

3.   Was any scene particularly difficult to act? Why? 

4.   How did the actors use their voice or body movement to 

achieve the desired effects? 

5.   Did the actors establish their characters more through dialogue 

or through movement and facial expression? 

6.   Was there anything about the acting, set or costumes that you 

particularly liked or disliked? 

7.   Do you recognise any particular style of the director? 

8.   How does this film compare to other films by the same 

director? 

51 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Cinematic aspects: 
•  Technical (camera angles, movements and positions and the effects they create, lighting) 
•  Sound and vision (sound effects, music, visual effects) 

Learners may be given the following questions to work on. 

Cinematic aspects: questions to consider 

1.  What visual images impressed you most? What did they 

make you feel or think about? 

2.  What sounds or music do you remember? What did they 

make you feel or think about? 

3.  What scene(s) had very effective or unusual editing? 

4.  Were any special effects used in the film? Did they add to the 

overall success of the film or otherwise? 

Many film scripts are available on the Internet or in book form, though captioned DVDs are 

probably sufficient to ensure that the class is able to follow the film. 

Some  DVDs  have  helpful  commentaries,  discussions,  interviews  and  documentary  material 

on the making of the film, which can be a useful learning resource. 

Excerpts  of  films  can  be  selected  for  the  purpose  of  appreciation  and  critical  analysis.  The 

following section provides further suggestions on teaching appreciation of films. 

4.3.5   Literary Appreciation 

While the previous sections (4.3.1 – 4.3.4) focus on approaches and strategies to help learners 

to  understand  and  interpret  literary  texts  by  exploring  the  different  aspects  of  the  various 

genres, this section takes a closer look at how to help learners to develop the ability to write 

an  appreciation  or  a  critical  analysis  of  a  poem  or  an  extract  from  a  prose  text,  which  the 

learners may or may not have studied. If the extract comes from a work the learners have not 

previously  studied,  in  order  to  get  them  to  concentrate  on  literary  matters,  it  is  advisable  to 

gloss difficult words or allow a dictionary to be used while writing the analysis. Occasionally 

a  few  introductory  sentences  can  accompany  the  passage  to  ensure  that  comprehending  it 

becomes easier.  Guided  questions  are  desirable  at  this  stage   unless  the  passage  is  a 

particularly accessible one. Learners need to be fully conscious that the piece of prose given 

to  them  has  been  extracted  from  a  longer  text  and  may  have  been  shortened  or  otherwise 

tailored to fit its purpose. They must in all cases try to establish the purpose of the passage, its 

tone and style. 

52 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

The  following  section  provides  suggestions  for  teaching  literary  appreciation  of  various 

genres.  Further  examples  of  critical  analysis  of  extracts  from  prose  texts  are  included  in 

Appendix  3  to  help  teachers  and  learners  to  understand  the  sort  of  comments  that  may  be 

expected  in  literary  appreciation.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  sample  analyses  and  suggested 

answers  included  in  this  chapter  and  the  appendices  are  for  illustration  purposes.  They  are 

examples which aim to provide a comprehensive picture of what teachers may look for in the 

various  texts.  They  are  by  no  means  representative  of  the  kind  of  work  learners  generally 

produce,  though  they  should  always  be  encouraged  and  helped  to  produce  work  of  a  high 

quality. 

Teaching suggestions 

I.      Extract from a novel 

******************************************************************* 

The Old Curiosity Shop*
 
Charles Dickens 

For  she  was  dead.  There,  upon  her  little  bed,  she  lay  at  rest.  The  solemn 
stillness was no marvel now. 

She was dead. No sleep so beautiful and calm, so free from trace of pain, so 
fair  to  look  upon.  She  seemed  a  creature  fresh  from  the  hand  of  God,  and 
waiting for the breath of life; not one who had lived and suffered death. 

Her  couch  was  dressed  with  here  and  there  some  winter  berries  and  green 
leaves, gathered in a spot she had been used to favour. “When I die, put near 
me  something  that  has  loved  the  light,  and  had  the  sky  above  it  always.” 
Those were her words. 

She was  dead. Dear,  gentle, patient, noble Nell was  dead. Her  little bird –  a 
poor  slight thing the pressure  of  a  finger  would have crushed  –  was  stirring 
nimbly  in  its  cage;  and  the  strong  heart  of  its  child-mistress  was  mute  and 
motionless for ever. 

Where  were  the  traces  of  her  early  cares,  her  sufferings,  and  fatigues?  All 
gone. Sorrow  was  dead  indeed in  her,  but  peace and  perfect happiness  were 
born; imaged in her tranquil beauty and profound repose. 

And  still  her  former  self  lay  there,  unaltered  in  this  change.  Yes.  The  old 
fireside  had  smiled  upon  that  same  sweet  face;  it  had  passed  like  a  dream 
through  haunts of  misery  and  care;  at  the  door  of  the  poor  schoolmaster  on 
the  summer  evening,  before  the  furnace  fire  upon  the  cold  wet  night,  at  the 
still bedside of  the dying boy, there had  been the  same  mild lovely look. So 

*   From  Ch.  7  from  The  Old  Curiosity  Shop  (1998)  by  Dickens,  Charles  edited  by  Brennan,  Elizabeth.  By 
permission of Oxford University Press. 

53 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

shall we know the angels in their majesty, after death. 

The old man held one languid arm in his, and had the small hand tight folded 
to  his  breast, for warmth.  It  was  the  hand  she  had  stretched out  to  him  with 
her  last  smile  –  the  hand  that had  led  him  on,  through  all their wanderings. 
Ever  and  anon  he  pressed  it  to  his  lips;  then  hugged  it  to  his  breast  again, 
murmuring that it was warmer now; and, as he said it, he looked, in agony, to 
those who stood around, as if imploring them to help her. 

She  was  dead,  and  past  all  help,  or  need  of  it.  The  ancient  rooms  she  had 
seemed to fill with life, even while her own was waning fast – the garden she 
had  tended  –  the  eyes  she  had  gladdened  –  the  noiseless  haunts  of  many  a 
thoughtful hour – the paths she had trodden as it were but yesterday – could 
know her never more. 

“It  is  not,”  said  the  schoolmaster,  as  he  bent  down  to  kiss  her  on  the  cheek, 
and  gave  his  tears  free  vent,  “it  is  not  on  earth  that  Heaven’s  justice  ends. 
Think  what  earth  is,  compared  with  the  World  to  which  her  young  spirit  has 
winged  its  early  flight;  and  say,  if  one  deliberate  wish  expressed  in  solemn 
terms above this bed could call her back to life, which of us would utter it!” 

******************************************************************* 

Pre-reading activity 

Let  learners  know  that  they  are  going  to  read  an  extract  from  a  19th  century  novel:  A 

young  adolescent  girl,  an  orphan,  looked  after  by  her  grandfather,  has,  after  a  short, 

hard life, died. Some friends visit the house. 

Ask learners to consider the following questions: 
•  What do you expect the passage to be like? 
•  What tone will it have? 
•  What techniques does the writer use? 
•  What details of setting could be used and possibly given symbolic importance? 
•  How would you write the scene to create the right impression in readers? 

Reading the passage 
•  Let learners share their expectations – writing them on the board, making sure 

that they include aspects such as language and syntax. 

•  Read the passage in an appropriate tone. 
•  Explain any words that cause trouble. 
•  Ask the learners to check how correct their predictions were. 
•  Cross out expectations that were not realised, and add newly discovered points. 
•  Handle questions. 

54 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Post-reading activity 

Ask the learners to write critical analyses of the extract. 

Note: this lesson is not for beginners, but for learners who are already familiar with the 

main techniques of prose writing. For the inexperienced/less able learners, it would be 

possible to give a framework for the analysis, e.g. 

•  aim of the passage; 
•  narrative voice; 
•  style and its suitability; 
•  parts of speech preferences; 
• 
• 
• 

linguistic features. 

tone; 

imagery; and 

Later, let the class read the best analyses and benefit from the examples. 

A sample analysis is provided here for illustrative purposes. 

This  extract  aims  to  move  the  readers  at  the  death  of  a  young  girl.  The  omniscient 
narrator  addresses  us  directly,  shows  us  Nell’s  body,  reminds  us  of  her  life  and 
presents  the  grief  of  her  grandfather.  The  style,  diction  and  syntax  are  all  simple  to 
reflect  the  innocence  of  this  dear  child.  Adjectives  abound,  but  they  are  nearly  all 
positive:  “solemn”,  “beautiful”,  “calm”,  “free”,  “fresh”,  “dear”,  “gentle”,  “patient”, 
“noble”, “perfect”, “tranquil”, “profound”. There is  a serene religious  acceptance of 
Nell’s death (Nell seems to be sleeping, and God, Heaven and angels are mentioned). 
Her  end  is  a  blessing  (see  the  comment  of  the  schoolmaster),  but  there’s  also 
pathos – Nell is cold, her grandfather cannot accept her death, and the schoolmaster 
weeps. The reader is expected to be moved. 

Nell is associated with nature. We read of winter berries and green leaves (the green 
of youth and the winter of death?), the light, the sky and her little bird. The fragility 
of  the  bird  parallels  that  of  Nell.  Was  the  cage  her  life?  Certainly  the  schoolmaster 
talks of the flight of her spirit. The few details we are given of her life suggest it was 
not  an  easy  one  (“haunts  of  misery  and  care”,  etc).  Touches  of  alliteration  help 
decorate  and  dignify  the  scene,  e.g.  “solemn  stillness”,  “loved  the  light”,  “noble 
Nell” and “mute and motionless”. Although Nell is  dead, she remains  very  present; 
she and her belongings are the grammatical subject of many of the sentences. 

Throughout  the  passage,  like  the  sounding  of  a  funeral  bell,  tolls  the  oft  repeated 
“She was dead”. 

55 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

II.  The short story 

Through the Tunnel 

Doris Lessing 

Pre-reading activity 

Tell the learners that they are going to read a story about a boy growing up. 

Before  reading  the  story,  they  need  to  do  some  research  and  thinking.  They  have  to 

work in groups and prepare short presentations on one of the following: 

•  male initiation rites and growing-up ceremonies; 
•  examples of young male growing-up stories (possibly films are easiest to think of); 
•  the Oedipus complex (and optionally, phallic symbols); 
•  the symbolism of tunnels, caves and underground places; 
•  parental possessiveness; and 
•  peer groups and adolescence. 

Reading the story 

Listen to the short presentations and answer questions. 

While  the  story  is  being  read,  ask  different  learners  to  monitor  and  take  notes  on 

various aspects, including: 

•  narration; 
•  language choice/diction; 
•  similes/imagery/symbols; 
•  syntax; 
•  plot development and suspense; 
•  setting; 
•  contrast; 
•  colour; and 
•  characters. 

Ask for reports on these aspects, correct misunderstandings and lead the class through 

questioning and clarification towards an understanding of the story. 

Possible examples of leading questions for discussion include: 

•  How is sexuality presented in the story? 
•  How is the mother-son relationship changed by the end of the story? What detail in  

particular reveals this change? 

•  What is the mood at the end of the story? 
•  Is the story sexist? 

56 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Post-reading activity 

Ask the learners to write a critical analysis of the story, or set them an essay on some 

aspect of it. 

Below is a sample analysis of the story. 

This  is  a  “growing  up”  story.  Children  pass  from  childhood  through  adolescence  to 
adulthood. Their relationships, feelings and bodies change as they grow and develop 
sexuality. This is the principal theme of this story. In many cultures, young men have 
to undergo initiation. These rituals often involve confinement in a small, dark space, 
pain and blood (in many cases, as a result of circumcision). All this is echoed in the 
story  (possibly  Doris  Lessing’s  African  background  is  relevant  in  this  respect). 
Initiation rituals lie behind many hero and quest stories, in which a  young man sets 
out from home, undergoes an ordeal, often fighting with a monster, and then returns 
home  victorious.  The  rocks  in  the  story  are  duly  described  as  being  like  monsters, 
octopuses  are  mentioned  and  there  is  a  reference  to  chivalry,  summoning  up  the 
image  of  the  young  knight’s  quest.  There  is  a  sexual  element  to  the  story  as  this  is 
obviously central to the experience of growing up. The older boys who inspire Jerry 
are naked. Some of the writing can be interpreted in sexual terms. For example, after 
his first encounter with the elder boys, Jerry “climbed back to the diving rock and sat 
down,  feeling  “the  hot  roughness  of  it  under  his  thighs”.  The  following  is  another 
example: 

....The  great  rock  the  big  boys  had  swum  through  rose  sheer  out 
of  the  white  sand,  black,  tufted  lightly  with  greenish  weed.  He  could 
see no gap in it. He swam down to its base. 

Again  and  again  he  rose,  took  a  big  chestful  of  air,  and  went 
down. Again and again he groped over the surface of the rock, feeling 
it, almost hugging it in the desperate need to find the entrance…. 

The  tunnel  is  also  a  birth  canal  through  which  Jerry  symbolically  swims  to  rebirth. 
This  is  also  part  of  the  Oedipal  content  of the  story.  Jerry  starts  the  story  as  a  little 
boy  following  his  widowed  mummy.  To  grow  up  he  needs  to  break  free  from  this 
intense  attachment  and  become  independent.  This  is  the  main  story  arc,  and  at  the 
end there are signs of a subtle change in his relationship with his mother. 

Other  themes  that  could  be  discussed  are  parental  possessiveness,  our  guilt  at 
growing  away  from  our  parents,  the  importance  of  same-sex  peer  groups  for 
adolescents, loneliness and the relationship of the tourist to the less sophisticated, but 
more “real”, native (a key element in, for example, the work of D.H. Lawrence and 
E.M. Forster). One can also see in the story the intense anxiety of the 1950s, caused 
by  psychological  theories  in  the  United  States,  about  the  danger  of  mothers  letting 
their sons become “mommy’s boys” who would probably develop into homosexuals. 

The  story  style  is  fairly  simple.  There  is  an  omniscient  narrator  who  describes 
everything  and  takes  us  into  the  minds  of  the  characters  by  means  of  commentary 
and free indirect speech; increasingly though as the story goes on it is Jerry’s mind 

57 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

we enter and his point of view we take. It is right, then, that the language should not 
be too  complex and elaborate for an  11-year-old  boy.  The style can be described as 
painterly.  What  there  is  to  be  seen  is  described  in  detail  and  with  great  attention  to 
colour. Simple similes are used (e.g. “like a slice of orange peel”, “like brown whales” 
and so on). There are a few passages of rich and poetic description (e.g. the paragraph 
beginning, “Under him, six or seven feet down…”). Adjectives do a lot of work, and 
the typical sentence tells us what Jerry did: he + verb. This indeed is the main focus 
of  the  story.  Pace  is  also  very  important.  Note  particularly  that  the  narration  slows 
down to prepare readers for the climactic journey through the tunnel. 

The  characterisation  is  basically  psychological.  We  are  given  insight  into  the  minds 
of characters, as noted earlier, by means of free indirect speech (a good example for 
the  mother  is  the  paragraph  beginning  “She  was  thinking…”,  and  for  Jerry  the  one 
beginning “She gave him a patient, inquisitive look…”.    Scenes such as the one in 
which Jerry clowns in front of the local boys are also important, giving us a glimpse 
into the personality of this rather intense and introspective boy. Dialogue also has a 
role, but we are given little idea as to how Jerry or his mother looks. The attention to 
the  mother’s  whiteness  and  gradual  reddening,  and  Jerry’s  final  brownness,  seems 
more symbolic than descriptive. 

The setting is crucial to the story, with the contrast between the safe, crowded tourist 
beach, and the rocky wilder bay symbolising the changes in Jerry. There is a lovely 
moment  when  Jerry,  swimming  out  to  sea  (a  symbol  of  sexuality  and  femininity, 
according  to  Freud),  sees  his  mother  in  the  distance  as  just  a  dab  of  colour.  This 
symbolises  Jerry’s  changing  relationship  with  his  mother  as  her  role  in  his  life 
decreases.  (The  goggles  he  buys  also  reinforce  the  point  of  seeing  things  in  a  new 
way.)  Thus  setting  and  symbolism  reinforce  theme,  and  contrast  helps  structure  the 
story. 

The main feeling at the end of the story is that Jerry has undergone his initiation; the 
obstacle no longer concerns him once it has been passed. There is, however, a certain 
openness  –  is  there  also  a  sense  of  the  emptiness  of  human  achievement;  how 
sometimes  things  we  desperately  wanted  can  suddenly  seem  trivial  when  we  have 
them?  Anyway,  this  is  a  fine  and  subtle  story  reflecting  on  a  young  man’s 
development – though whether a feminist would find some of its assumptions highly 
questionable is another point… 

58 

 

 

 

 

Poem 

****************************************************************** 

A Daughter of Eve 

A fool I was to sleep at noon, And 
wake when night is chilly Beneath 
the comfortless cold moon; A fool to 
pluck my rose too soon, 
A fool to snap my lily. 

My garden-plot I have not kept; 
Faded and all-forsaken, 
I weep as I have never wept: 
Oh it was summer when I slept, 
It’s winter now I waken. 

Talk what you please of future spring 
And sun-warm’d sweet to-morrow:– 
Stripp’d bare of hope and everything, 
No more to laugh, no more to sing, 
I sit alone with sorrow. 

Christina Rossetti 

****************************************************************** 

Pre-reading activity 

Tell the class that later on they are going to read a 19th century poem about a girl who 

loses her virginity before marriage. 

Ask  various  members  of  the  class  to  do  some  research  prior  to  reading  the  poem. 

Possible topics: 
•  The story of Adam and Eve; 
•  Traditional views on suitable behaviour for young women and premarital sex; 
•  The New Testament parable of the Foolish Virgins; 
•  The fable of the ant and the grasshopper; 
•  Flowers and their symbolic associations with young women and sexuality; and 
•  Moon symbolism. 

Reading the poem 
•  Ask the groups to report on their findings. 
•  Read the poem. 
•  Ask for comment on the diction, tone, imagery and message. 
•  Ask for comment on the sounds in lines 4–5 and 15. 

59 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

Post-reading activity 

Ask  learners  how  they  would  illustrate  the  poem,  or  ask  them  to  write  a  critical 

analysis. 

Below is a sample analysis of the poem. 

This  beautiful  little  lyric,  with  its  simple  diction  and  skilful  triple  rhymes,  is  filled 
with  sadness.  The  imagery  comes  from  nature  (times  of  the  day,  times  of  the  year, 
the moon, flowers and gardens). The title explains the symbolism: just as Eve fell to 
temptation,  so  has  the  poetic  persona.  A  number  of  other  stories  can  be  detected 
below  the  surface.  Jesus  told  the  parable  of  the  careless  virgins,  who  were  asleep 
when  the  bridegroom  came  and  so  missed  their  chance  of  happiness.  The  fable  of 
the ant which toiled all summer to prepare for winter, while the careless grasshopper 
played  and  then  starved,  seems  relevant  too.  The  lily  is  associated  with  the  Virgin 
Mary  and  the  plucking  of  flowers  with  a  girl’s  loss  of  virginity.  The  poem  is  a 
solemn  warning  to  young  women  to  use  their  time  well,  be  industrious  and  avoid 
sexual  temptation  (a  modern feminist  might,  indeed, find  a lot to  argue  with  in  the 
poem). The persona almost becomes a personification of regret as, at the end of the 
poem, she sits hopeless and alone. 

The strong consonants  of “pluck” and “snap” emphasise the force of these actions. 
Alliteration  is  used  for  decorative  emphasis  in  lines  7,  8,  9,  10,  12  and  15.  The 
assonance  of  “o”  (-lone/-row)  sounds  like  a  sigh  (Oh).  The  poem  expresses  the 
beauty of the woman, but shows how she has misused and wasted it. 

IV.   Extract from a play 

The Duchess of Malfi*
John Webster 
****************************************************************** 

 

BOSOLA 

Most ambitiously: princes’ images on their tombs do not 
lie, as they were wont1, seeming to pray up to heaven; but with their 
hands under their cheeks, as if they died of the tooth-ache. They 
are not carved with their eyes fixed upon the stars, but as their 
minds were wholly bent upon the world, the selfsame way they seem 
to turn their faces. 

DUCHESS 

Let me know fully therefore the effect 
Of this thy dismal preparation, 
This talk fit for a charnel2. 

* 

Act IV, scene ii “The Duchess of Malfi” from The Duchess of Malfi and Other Plays (1998) by Webster, J. By 
permission of Oxford University Press. 

60 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

BOSOLA 
[Enter EXECUTIONERS, with a coffin, cords, and a bell] 

Now I shall:-- 

Here is a present from your princely brothers; 
And may it arrive welcome, for it brings 
Last benefit, last sorrow. 

DUCHESS 

Let me see it: 
I have so much obedience in my blood, 
I wish it in their veins to do them good. 

BOSOLA 

This is your last presence-chamber. 

CARIOLA 

O my sweet lady! 

DUCHESS 

Peace; it affrights not me. 

BOSOLA 

I am the common bellman 
That usually is sent to condemned persons 
The night before they suffer. 

DUCHESS 

Even now thou said’st 
Thou wast a tomb-maker. 

BOSOLA 

’Twas to bring you 
By degrees to mortification3. Listen. 

[Rings the bell.]   

Hark, now everything is still, 
The screech-owl4 and the whistler shrill 
Call upon our dame aloud, 
And bid her quickly don5 her shroud! 
Much you had of land and rent; 
Your length in clay’s now competent6: 
A long war disturbed your mind; 
Here your perfect peace is signed. 
Of what is ’t fools make such vain keeping? 
Sin their conception, their birth weeping, 
Their life a general mist of error, 
Their death a hideous storm of terror. 
Strew your hair with powders sweet, 
Don clean linen, bathe your feet, 
And (the foul fiend more to check) 
A crucifix let bless your neck. 
’Tis now full tide ’tween night and day; 
End your groan, and come away. 

CARIOLA 

Hence, villains, tyrants, murderers! Alas! 
What will you do with my lady? – Call for help! 

DUCHESS 

To whom? To our next neighbours? They are mad-folks. 

61 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BOSOLA 

Remove that noise. 

[EXECUTIONERS seize CARIOLA, who struggles.] 

DUCHESS 

Farewell, Cariola. 
In my last will I have not much to give: 
A many hungry guests have fed upon me; 
Thine will be a poor reversion7. 

CARIOLA 

I will die with her. 

DUCHESS 

I pray thee, look thou giv’st my little boy 
Some syrup for his cold, and let the girl 
Say her prayers ere she sleep. 

[CARIOLA is forced out by the EXECUTIONERS.] 

Now what you please: 
What death? 

BOSOLA 

Strangling; here are your executioners. 

DUCHESS 

I forgive them: 
The apoplexy, catarrh, or cough o’ th’ lungs, 
Would do as much as they do. 

BOSOLA 

Doth not death fright you? 

DUCHESS 

BOSOLA 

DUCHESS 

Who would be afraid on ’t, 
Knowing to meet such excellent company 
In th’ other world? 

Yet, methinks, 
The manner of your death should much afflict you: 
This cord should terrify you. 

Not a whit: 
What would it pleasure me to have my throat cut 
With diamonds? or to be smothered 
With cassia? or to be shot to death with pearls8? 
I know death hath ten thousand several doors 
For men to take their exits; and ’tis found 
They go on such strange geometrical hinges, 
You may open them both ways: any way, for heaven-sake, 
So I were out of your whispering. Tell my brothers 
That I perceive death, now I am well awake, 
Best gift is they can give or I can take. 
I would fain put off my last woman’s-fault9, 
I’d not be tedious to you. 

FIRST EXECUTIONER 

We are ready. 

62 

 

 

 

 

 

DUCHESS 

Dispose my breath how please you; but my body10
Bestow upon my women, will you? 

 

FIRST EXECUTIONER 

Yes. 

DUCHESS 

Pull, and pull strongly, for your able strength 
Must pull down heaven upon me: – 
Yet stay; heaven-gates are not so highly arched 
As princes’ palaces; they that enter there 
Must go upon their knees [Kneels]. – Come, violent death, 
Serve for mandragora11 to make me sleep! – 
Go tell my brothers, when I am laid out, 
They then may feed in quiet. 

[They strangle her.] 

BOSOLA 

Where’s the waiting-woman12? 
Fetch her: some other strangle the children. 

[Enter EXECUTIONERS. Enter one with CARIOLA] 

Look you, there sleeps your mistress. 

CARIOLA 

O, you are damned 
Perpetually for this! My turn is next; 
Is ’t not so ordered? 

BOSOLA 

Yes, and I am glad 
You are so well prepared for ’t. 

CARIOLA 

You are deceived, sir, 
I am not prepared for ’t! I will not die! 
I will first come to my answer; and know 
How I have offended. 

BOSOLA 

Come, despatch her. – 
You kept her counsel; now you shall keep ours. 

CARIOLA 

I will not die, I must not; I am contracted13
To a young gentleman. 

 

FIRST EXECUTIONER  [Showing the noose] Here’s your wedding-ring14. 

CARIOLA 

Let me but speak with the Duke. I’ll discover 
Treason to his person. 

BOSOLA 

Delays:– throttle her. 

FIRST EXECUTIONER 

She bites and scratches! 

CARIOLA 

If you kill me now, 

63 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I am damned! I have not been at confession 
This two years. 

BOSOLA 

[To EXECUTIONERS.] When? 

CARIOLA 

I am quick with child15. 

BOSOLA 

Why, then, 
Your credit’s16 saved. 
[EXECUTIONERS strangle CARIOLA.] 

Bear her into the next room; 
Let this lie still. 

[Exeunt the EXECUTIONERS with the body of CARIOLA.] 

****************************************************************** 

Glossary: 
1. 

as they were wont = as they were accustomed to. To see the change in style in 

tombs, compare the classic tombs with the person lying on his/her back looking 

upwards: 

www.bbc.co.uk/history/state/church_reformation/church_gallery.shtml with the 

Jacobean style in which the figure leans on one elbow (as if the person had 

toothache), as in the tomb of St. John Leventhorpe and his wife Joan: 

www.englishchurch.org/Tour.htm. Bosola suggests the change of style mirrors 

a change of attitude. 

2. 

charnel = bone store 

3.  mortification = repentance, with a pun on “death” 

4. 

5. 

screech owl, associated with graveyards 

don = put on 

6.  All you need now is enough earth to cover your body. 

7. 

8. 

I can’t leave you much money. 

to be made unable to breathe with expensive perfume 

9.  Women are said to talk too much; I will be brief and not bore you. 

10. 

i.e. give my body 

11.  mandragora = a poison 

12.  waiting-woman = a maid 

13. 

14. 

i.e. engaged to be married 

i.e. the rope around her neck 

15.  quick with child = pregnant 

16.  credit = good reputation 

64 

 

 

 
 

 

Pre-reading activity 

Tell learners that the extract they are going to read comes from a play, The Duchess of 

Malfi by John Webster, written around 1611. 

In the early 17th century, there was a fashion for Revenge Drama – the plays are dark 

ones,  involving  cruel  murder,  ghosts  and  especially  incest  (Shakespeare’s  Hamlet  is 

part  of  the  genre,  and  possibly  also  Macbeth).  The  works  have  some  similarities  with 

the modern thriller and horror genres. 

The Duchess has had a secret marriage and children, against the wishes of her powerful 

brothers.  When  they  find  out  the truth,  they  confine  her  to  a  madhouse  and,  unable  to 

bear  the  thought  of  the  dishonour  they  feel  her  behaviour  has  brought  on  them,  they 

order her murder by their servant, Bosola. 

Ask learners to 

1.    Read the extract and the notes. Make sure that they understand what is being said. 

2.  Think  about  the  effect  the  writer  wants  to  create  and  the  dramatic  techniques  he 

uses, i.e. 

− 

− 

− 

− 

− 

− 

the diction (look for any word sets) and imagery 

the action on the stage 

the pace of the action 

the characterisation of the Duchess 

the characterisation of Bosola 

the role of Cariola. 

3.   Be prepared to share their thoughts with the class. 

Reading the play 
•  Have learners read the extract aloud in class. 
•  Handle  any  questions. 
•  Discuss the points raised in the pre-reading activity. 
•  Discuss the four speeches: 

–  Bosola’s “Most ambitiously…”; 

–  Bosola’s “Hark, now everything is still…”; 

– 

– 

the Duchess’ “Not a whit…”; and 

the Duchess’ “Pull, and pull strongly…”. 

Concentrate especially on the style and imagery, and the atmosphere they create. 

Post-reading activity 

Ask  learners  to  write  either  an  analysis  bringing  all  these  points  together,  or  some 

production notes on the  clothes/costumes, lighting, props, scenery, background noises, 

music, stage movement and style of speech they would recommend to bring out the full 

potential of the extract. 

65 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Below is a sample analysis. 

This  death  scene  is  drawn  out,  moves  from  horror  to  horror,  and  almost  takes 
pleasure  in  its  exaggerated,  decorative  presentation  of  murder.  The  setting  –  a 
madhouse,  possibly  with  screams  and  wild  yells  in  the  background  –  is  bizarre 
enough.  Bosola  certainly  does  not  simply  kill  the  Duchess.  He  discusses  tombs, 
brings    in    a    parade    of    death    (executioners    with    a    coffin),    delivers    a 
speech/poem/song  on  death,  discusses  the  mode  of  death,  waits  while  the  Duchess 
prepares herself, orders the execution, and when we think the horror might be over, 
commences  killing  the  Duchess’s  children  and  maid,  the  last  a  slow  affair  with 
Cariola resisting her end, screaming and fighting to the last. There is plenty here for 
a director to work on and bring alive through lighting, sound and colour. 

There  are  four  remarkable  speeches  in  this  extract.  First,  Bosola’s  short  prose 
speech  at the beginning  of the extract: Bosola  uses the changing styles of tombs to 
suggest  that  the  world  and  its  rulers  have  become  less  spiritual.  The  reference  to 
toothache strikes one as strange and slightly unsettling. Next, there is Bosola’s death 
song,  arguing  the  death  should  be  welcomed,  but  at  the  same  time  making  it 
hideous.  The  song  creates  effects  by  contrast  –  the  carefully  rhymed  beauty  of  the 
poetry against the horror of the content. The effect runs throughout the extract: life 
against death, the beauty and calm of the Duchess against her violent murder. 

The Duchess has two long speeches. “Not a whit…” adds to the strange atmosphere, 
with its bizarre, imaginary forms of death – having one’s throat cut with diamonds, 
being  suffocated  with  perfume,  or  being  shot  with  pearls.  Her  final  speech  has 
grandeur and gives her a noble end. 

In  terms  of  characterisation,  Bosola  is  calm  and  ironic  in  overseeing  these  foul 
murders  (e.g.  “Here  is  a  present  from  your  princely  brothers”  and  “Why  then  your 
credit’s  saved”).  His  cruelty  comes  over  in  his  comments  to  the  Duchess  on  the 
manner of her death, gloating over her prospective suffering, and, most chillingly of 
all, when he reduces Cariola to a mere nothing: “Remove that noise”. 

The  scene  is  designed  to  attract  our  sympathy  for  the  Duchess.  This  is  done  by 
emphasising the cruelty of her killers, her dignity, the devotion of her servant to her, 
her  concern  for  Cariola,  her  touching  instructions  about  her  children  (“look  thou 
giv’st  my  little  boy  some  syrup  for  his  cold”)  and  her  final  religious  humility.  She 
shows the strength  of her character in her sharp answers to Bosola, and in her own 
irony. Her crime has been to dare to be herself and take her own decisions, but she 
says she will try to avoid that other great fault of women – talking too much – so she 
cuts her speech short (“I’d not be tedious to you”). Her tone is neatly emphasised by 
the sudden rhyme awake/take in the same speech. 

Cariola is a devoted servant, whose humanity is  emphasised by her obvious fear of 
death.  In  this  she  contrasts  with  the  Duchess,  who  shows  her  noble  blood  by 
accepting  her  fate.  Although  the  scene  seems  to  question  gender  stereotypes,  it 
accepts ones about social class. 

66 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Overall,  the  scene  is  dark  and  frightening  with  various  bizarre  details  creating  an 
unsettling, slightly weird effect. 

Notes: 

This  is  for  a  fairly  advanced  stage  in  the  course  after  reading  easier  and  more  modern 

plays. 

It  might  be  interesting  to  relate  the  dark  world  of  Jacobean  drama  to  Mannerist  art  in 

Europe  and  look  at  paintings  such  as  Caravaggio’s  Martyrdom  of  St  Matthew  for  the 

same exaggerated and sadistic world. 

(See www.phespirit.info/pictures/caravaggio/p030.htm) 

V.  Film 

(1)   The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers 

Peter Jackson (2002) 

In this example, a film based on a well-known text is used to help learners to see the 

sort of decisions directors take. 

Pre-viewing activity 

Ask learners to read two extracts from J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings, The Two 

Towers: 

•  Book III, chapter IV, from the beginning to “He ended, and strode on silently, and in 

all the wood, as far as the ear could reach, there was not a sound.”; and 

•  Book IV, chapter III. 

Viewing the film 

Learners watch Chapters 14 and 15, “Fangorn Forest” and “The Black Gate is Closed” 

from  Peter Jackson’s film of the book (the sections that show Merry  and Pippin being 

carried along by Treebeard the Ent, and Frodo, Sam and Gollum at the Black Gate). 

Learners may view the sections a number of times and discuss the following: 

the changes/differences between the book and film; 

the setting and camera work; 

the actors/characters; 

• 
• 
• 
• 
•  plot tension; and 
• 

the sound; 

the relationship between the two scenes. 

67 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Post-viewing activity 

Learners write a critical analysis in the form of a commentary on the extract from the 

film. They may work in groups if they prefer. 

Below is a sample analysis. 

The  scene  opens  with  three  people  in  a  lifeless,  stony  landscape,  confronting 
danger.  Frodo,  Sam and  Gollum are  seen  climbing  slate-like  blue  rocks.  Strong 
dissonant  music  plays  as  we  reach  the  top  and  get  our  first  look  at  the  Black 
Gate  in  the  sort  of  Gothic  style  associated  with  horror  stories.  It  stands  among 
barren  mountains  with  a  threatening  sky,  tinged  blood  red.  Frodo,  as  befits  the 
hero, is the more handsome with curly hair and piercing blue eyes. Sam, as suits 
the hero’s companion, is a more ordinary figure. Gollum is a fascinating blend of 
the pitiable and vulnerable (almost  a naked  child) and the  evil (like  a  grub or  a 
moving corpse). 

The  camera  shows  us  the  battlements.  Everything  is  grey  and  spiky.  Then  we 
look  down  on  marching  columns  of  soldiers.  Orders  are  shouted,  drums  beaten 
and a horn sounded, so horrible it seems to hurt Gollum. The viewer is reminded 
of the parades loved by dictators and totalitarian states. Trolls labour to open the 
Black Gate. A view along the battlements makes  them look like a shark’s jaws, 
consistent with the image of Mordor as some all-consuming beast. 

We  return  to  the  three  travellers.  Sam  moves  forward,  the  rock  suddenly  gives 
way,  and  he  falls.  The  camera  cuts  between  the  mishap  and  the  marching  men. 
Two  of  the  men  hear  something  and  run  to  investigate.  Frodo  rushes  to  help 
Sam.  The  suspense  is  derived  from  the  expectation  that  they  will  be  found,  but 
the  surprise  is  that,  thanks  to  Frodo’s  quick  action,  they  are  rendered  invisible 
beneath Frodo’s cape. A point of view shot shows what they see as the soldiers 
approach  with  spears.  There  is  a  tense  moment  and  then  they  turn  away  and 
drums, shouts, the tramp of marching feet and heavy music take over. 

Gollum dramatically pulls the hobbits back from trying to  enter the  gates and a 
conversation  follows,  portrayed  by  means  of  cuts  and  close-ups.  Gollum  begs, 
but  his  sideways-slanting  eyes  make  him  seem  untrustworthy;  Sam’s  eyes  look 
down  showing  his  distrust  and  unease,  and  Frodo  gives  Sam  a  sidelong  glance, 
knowing  he  is  not  trusted.  This  increases  the  suspense  generated  by  the 
characters’  relationship,  embodying  as  it  does  the  potential  for  betrayal.  The 
gates clang shut. 

(2)  Gladiator 

Ridley Scott (2000) 

This  second  example  illustrates  how  a  film  extract  can  be  used  without  relying  on 

knowledge  of  the  story’s  source  or  the  rest  of  the  film.  The  extract  is  taken  from  the 

68 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 

end of the film Gladiator, from the emergence of Commodus in the arena to the final 

credits. 

Pre-viewing activity 
•  Ask learners to watch the extract. The film gives a fictional account of a lifelong 
rivalry  between  the  real-life  Roman  Emperor  Commodus  and  a  heroic  figure 
named  Maximus.  The  part  of  the  film  learners  will  watch  shows  their  final 
confrontation, fighting as gladiators in the Colosseum at Rome. 

•  To  prepare  for  the  viewing,  learners  need  to  do  some  research  into  the  Roman 

circus, gladiators and the emperor Commodus. 

Viewing the extract 
•  Ask  some  members  of  the  class  to  explain  what  they  have  found  out  about  the 

topics set. 

•  Let the class share their opinions and insights and ask questions. 

Post-viewing activity 

Ask learners to write a critical analysis of what they have seen. 

Below is a sample analysis. 

Grand  music  plays  as  the  black-clad  soldiers  move  aside  to  reveal  the  emperor 
Commodus, as in  some  old Hollywood musical,  in  ornate  white armour,  ready to 
fight  his  foe  Maximus  (in  black)  in  an  arena  littered  with  red  rose  petals. 
Commodus is  portrayed  as a showman, very  determined to  project  himself as the 
hero of the show. Maximus’ simple ceremony of touching the earth, although not 
explained here, seems far more genuine than the hollow gestures of the Emperor. 

Close-ups  between  the  foes  show  this  will  be  a  fight  to  the  death.  The  fight  is 
shown realistically with fast camerawork and swirling dust. The excitement of the 
crowd,  the  cries  of  the  combatants  and  the  clang  of  the  swords  add  to  the 
atmosphere.  The  battle  goes  to  and  fro.  Maximus  is  obviously  seriously  injured, 
but then Commodus loses his sword. We see shock in his eyes. This arrogant man 
has  never  considered  that  he  might  lose.  He  demands  a  sword  but  his  days  of 
power are over and he is disobeyed. 

Maximus is dying. This is conveyed by shots of another place, shown half drained 
of  colour,  and  obviously  visionary.  The  speed  of  the  film  slows  as  we  look  at  a 
wall  with  a  door.  Then  Commodus  leaps  at  Maximus;  Maximus  refocusses  and 
fights,  but  honourably  takes  no  advantage  of  his  sword  and  fights  with  his  fists. 
Commodus draws a dagger and tries to stab Maximus, but with beautiful irony, his 
face symbolically covered with blood, the emperor dies impaled on his own blade. 

As  he  sinks,  we  cut  to  a  long  shot  and  silence  reigns  as  low  music  starts.  The 
emperor’s death is not the key moment of this scene – that is yet to come. We are 

69 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

now  approaching  the  epic  ending.  Maximus  gives  a  little  bow,  but  his  life  is 
ebbing  away.  We  return  to  the  vision  as  a  solo  voice  joins  the  music.  Then  a 
close-up  of  Maximus  as  he  speaks  his  last  noble  words,  “Free  my  men,”  and 
“There was a dream that was Rome. It shall be realised.”. He falls. The film cuts 
to  the  visionary  world.  He  enters  the  door  and  finds  open  fields.  Cutting  back  to 
the  arena,  the  screen  shows  a  noblewoman coming  and  kneeling  over  him  with a 
startling blue sky behind her head. The camera looks down at the dying Maximus, 
and  the  woman  weeps.  Maximus’s  death  is  realised  cinematically  as  a  strange 
floating  movement  over  the  rose-petalled  ground.  His  wife  and  son  prepared  to 
greet him among the fields in that other world. 

Serious,  slow  orchestral  music  prepares  for  the  grand  finale.  The  noble  lady 
speaks:  “He  was  a  soldier  of  Rome.  Honour  him.”  And  people  move  forward  to 
carry  him  aloft  out  of  the  arena,  leaving  the  dead  emperor  forgotten  and 
unmourned. 

The  short  scene  of  an  African  laying  two  little  clay  figures  to  rest  in  the  earth 
follows. There is a sense of closure in his gesture. He also talks of freedom and of 
rejoining Maximus, but “not yet”. The final feeling is not one of despair – life has 
its  sadness,  but  its  joy  also.  The  camera  returns  to  a  misty  Colosseum,  and  rises. 
We  see,  beyond  the  top  of  the  walls,  Roman  splendour  with  a  red  sun  above  it. 
Given  the  events,  this  is  probably  sun-set:  Commodus  and  Maximus  have  died, 
and the Empire is entering a period of decline; but there is room for  the  opposite 
view  –  after  all,  Maximus  has  finally  defeated  the  tyrant.  The  music  climaxes, 
creating a final mood of epic dignity. 

4.3.6   Schools of Literary Criticism 

Learners  at  this  stage  are  not  expected  to  learn  about  literary  theories  or  the  tenets  of  the 

various schools of criticism. They should, however, be aware that there are different views of 

famous  texts  and  controversies  over  the  best  ways  to  interpret  them  (e.g.  disputes  over  the 

status  of  Satan  in  Paradise  Lost,  or  Achebe’s  famous  criticism  of  Heart  of  Darkness  for 

racism). 

In discussing set texts, teachers may wish to draw on the insights of various critical schools. 

A few general notes are offered here on those believed likely to be most relevant. 

Humanistic criticism 

Here  the  main  interest  is  in  discussing  the  moral  issues  raised  by  a  work  of  literature. 

Characters  and  motivation  receive  careful  scrutiny,  and  literature  is  used  as  a  means  to 

discuss life. This is the style of criticism learners usually find most appealing at this stage. 

70 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Formalist and language-based criticism 

This approach concentrates on style, the manipulation of language, the structure of a text, its 

relation to other texts and the conventions of genre. 

Biographical criticism 

The critic relates the literary work to the life of its author. This can be more illuminating with 

some  writers  than  others,  e.g.  Sylvia  Plath’s  life  story  is  helpful  in  approaching  her  verse. 

Followers of the New Criticism, however, prefer to look at a poem as an independent artefact 

to be studied in isolation (see “New Criticism” below). 

Marxist-influenced criticism 

This is concerned  with the rise  and  fall of different classes and the economic  circumstances 

that  texts  emerge  from.  Literary  texts  are  seen  as  the  product  of  societies  rather  than  of 

autonomous individuals. 

Feminist criticism 

This  is  closely  related  to  Marxist  criticism.  The  most  prominent  form  it  takes  is  an 

exploration  of  the  ways  in  which  men  have  portrayed  women  in  their  writing,  stereotyping 

and  marginalising  them.  It  is  also  interested  in  the  growth  of  writing  by  women,  and  the 

question as to whether women can/should use the same literary  forms and  language as men, 

or need to develop their own literature. 

Post-colonial criticism 

Various  critics  have  explored  the  ways  in  which  colonialism  and  imperialism  have  been 

reflected in literature and continue to affect cultures which have been subjected to them. Such 

critics  might,  for  example,  approach The Tempest as  a  play  about  Prospero’s  colonisation  of 

the  island  and  enslavement  of  the  aboriginal  population  (Ariel  and  Caliban).  Edward  Said’s 

work  on  “orientalism”  has  opened  up  study  of  the  ways  in  which  cultures  have  viewed  one 

another,  and more particularly the ways in which  dominant cultures regard foreign ones  and 

justify their exploitation. 

New criticism 

Critics  of  this  school  view  a  literary  work  as  an  independent  and  self-sufficient  object,  and 

argue  for  close  reading  and  analysis  of  its  formal  properties,  rather  than  having  recourse  to 

the biography and psychology of the author and to literary history. 

71 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

New historical criticism 

This  moves  beyond  the  traditional  history  of  literature,  to  a  consideration  of  the  historical 

circumstances behind a given text (e.g. Macbeth is written for the court of James I, the first of 

the Scottish Stuart kings of England, and the author of a book on witchcraft as well as being a 

strong defender of the divine right of kings). 

Psychoanalytic criticism 

Critics  of  this  school  use  the  theories  of  Freud  and  Jung.  The  writer  or  the  characters  in  a 

work  of  literature  may  be  psychoanalysed.  Maybe  the  most  famous  example  of  this  type  of 

criticism is the reading of Hamlet as a play about Hamlet’s Oedipal feelings about Hamlet the 

elder,  Claudius  and  Gertrude.  The  work  of  Lacan has  created  interest in  the  development  of 

the Self through concepts of the Other. 

The more ways in which learners are encouraged to look at texts, the richer their experience 

of literature will be. 

4.3.7   Assessment for Learning 

Assessment is an integral part of the learning and teaching process. Therefore, while teachers 

are  using  any  of  the  pedagogical  approaches  or  strategies  suggested  in  this  chapter,  they 

should  consider  using,  where  appropriate,  formative  and  summative  assessment  to  further 

promote and enhance student learning. Fundamentally, assessment involves both teachers and 

learners  reflecting  on  assessment  data:  on  the  one  hand,  it  should  provide  learners  with 

appraisal  and  feedback  on  their  performance  in  relation  to  the  learning  objectives  to  help 

them  to  improve;  and  on  the  other,  it  offers  teachers  information  for  effective  planning  and 

intervention.  Chapter  5  considers  in  more  detail  how  assessment  is  approached  in  the 

Literature in English curriculum. 

4.4    Quality Interaction 

Section  4.3  has  offered  a  range  of  learning  and  teaching  approaches  and  strategies  that 

teachers  might  like  to  consider  to  achieve  specific  learning  targets  and  objectives  suited  to 

learners’  needs  and  abilities.  Whatever  approaches  or  strategies  they  choose,  however, 

teachers  are  encouraged  to  build  in  quality  interaction  to  ensure  effective  learning.  The 

following  example,  which  focusses  on  the  use  of  short  stories  to  develop  skills  of  literary 

comprehension  and  appreciation,  illustrates  how  such  an  interactive  process  can  be  brought 

about: 

72 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

Scaffolding 

Before learners approach a particular story, the teacher should provide scaffolds or means of 

support to assist comprehension. For example, he/she may help build learners’ vocabulary by 

explaining, or asking them to look up, key words or phrases that are crucial to understanding 

the  text.  He/she  may  also  help  increase  learners’ world  knowledge  by  encouraging  them  to 

find information about a certain topic, issue, historical event or cultural practice that is related 

to the central theme or even presented in the story. Similarly, prompting learners to reflect on 

their own experience, and to project themselves into situations similar to those which occur in 

the text, are good ways of ensuring that learners approach it with the right mental set. 

Questioning 

To   foster   a   close   interaction   with   the   text   and   develop   higher-order   thinking   skills, 

open-ended  questioning  is  strongly  encouraged.  Whether  they  are  involved  in  a  group 

discussion  or  an  individual  task,  learners  should  not  just  be  engaged  with  questions  which 

aim  at  eliciting  information-based  responses.  They  should  also  be  provided  with  questions 

that stimulate reasoned interpretation and personal response. For example, they may be asked 

to  discuss  the  motive  of  a  certain  character  who  has  opted  for  a  particular  course  of  action, 

and  give  justifications  for  their  interpretation;  or  they  can  be  asked  to  imagine  that  they  are 

that character, disclosing their feelings in a letter to an intimate friend after reflecting on the 

incident.  Engaging  learners  in  this  way  will  enable  them  to  explore  their  own  feelings, 

develop their own responses and make their own judgements – crucial skills which they can 

apply to the understanding and appreciation of a wider range of literary texts. 

Feedback 

Constructive feedback or advice should be provided during and/or after each learning activity 

to  let  learners  know  how  well  they  have  done  and  how  they  can  make  improvement.  For 

example, learners can be asked to write a  critical  essay on the story they  have read,  and the 

teacher may provide comments on their drafts in terms of content, organisation and language, 

based  on  which  learners  will  make  revisions  to  produce  texts  of  better  quality.  The  teacher 

need  not  be  the  sole  source  of  quality  feedback.  This  can  come  through  learners’  direct 

involvement in assessing their own and others’ work. Peer and self feedback, based on clear 

criteria, enhance audience awareness and encourage a critical response to texts. 

4.5    A Learning Community 

As suggested in section  3.3.5, teachers and learners are encouraged to work closely together 

as  a  learning  community  that  is  characterised  by  mutual  trust,  and  which  fosters  active 

learning, co-operation and teamwork. A learning community that is conducive to increasing 

73 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

learners’ involvement and motivation easily fosters a strong sense of membership, as teachers 

and  learners  become  partners/joint  investigators  in  the  process  of  developing  knowledge. 

Further, a learning community enables learners to develop their capacity to be responsible for 

their own learning and to care about the learning of their peers. 

 

Such  a  community  can  be  created  in  the  study  of  Literature  in  English  through  giving 

learners  plenty  of  opportunities  to  discuss  and  share  ideas  and  feelings  about  the  texts  they 

have  read  or  viewed,  to  collaborate  on  projects  or  performances,  and  to  support  each  other 

through  peer  feedback.  The  sense  of  membership  that  learners  share  enables  them  to 

experiment  with  the  literary  knowledge  and  skills  they  have  developed.  Moreover,  through 

engaging  in  self-directed  learning,  a  strong  sense  of  empowerment  can  be  generated,  as 

students  set  their  own  learning  goals  and  monitor  their  own  progress  through  individual  or 

team effort. 

Apart  from  promoting  partnership  between  learners  in  learning,  an  effective  learning 

community also involves a close partnership between the teacher and learners. Far from being 

a mere manager of class activities and transmitter of knowledge, the teacher learns and works 

together  with  the  learners,  forming  a  mentoring  relationship  with  them.  Strategies  for 

building active learning which teachers are encouraged to promote include: 

•  Collaborative  learning  – This provides learners with the opportunity  to  learn actively, 
to   negotiate   with   each   other   to   discover   meaning,   and   to   develop   and   share 

understanding of the literary texts. 

•  Problem-solving  –  This  allows  learners  to  work,  often  in  small  groups,  on  tasks  or 
projects  to  strengthen  their  critical  and  collaborative  abilities  through  analysing  closely 

various  aspects  of  literary  texts,  discussing  possible  readings,  and  working  out  or 

justifying their own interpretations. 

•  Experiential  learning  –  This  involves  the  use  of  a  variety  of  life-wide  learning 
activities  that  enable  learners  to  connect  theory  with  practice,  and  to  apply  the  literary 

knowledge  and  skills  they  have  developed  in  authentic  and  purposeful  contexts  (e.g. 

writing a review of a theatre performance). 

•  Ongoing  reflection –  Such  practice  is  critical  to  the  success  of  a  learning  community. 
Reflective  learners  who  are  able  to  draw  consciously  on  their  experiences  are  more 

motivated,  confident  and  effective  as  learners,  because  they  constantly  examine  what 

they  have  learned,  how  they  have  learned  it,  and  how  they  could  further  improve  their 

learning. 

•  Peer  and  self  feedback  –  Used  appropriately,  these  are  powerful  evaluative  tools  for 
improving  students’  learning.  While  the  former  facilitates  enhanced  interaction  and 

mutual  support  amongst  learners  and  allows  them  insights  into  others’  points  of  view, 

the  latter  encourages  self-directed  learning  and  critical  self-reflection,  key  enabling 

skills in the development of learner autonomy. 

74 

 
 

 
 

 

4.6    Catering for Learner Diversity 

4.6.1   General Considerations 

Every  class  is  composed  of  individuals  who  differ  from  each  other  in  terms  of  maturity, 

motivation, ability, learning styles, aspirations and interests. Catering for learner diversity is a 

significant and challenging consideration in determining learning and teaching content, level 

and methods. 

To  enhance  curriculum  planning  as  well  as  learning  and  teaching  in  a  way  that  will  help 

different students to learn effectively, teachers are encouraged to: 

•  be  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  different  learners  and  appreciate  their  capacity  to  learn  and  

improve; 

•  make use of materials and activities which will arouse different learners’ interests, and are  

relevant to learners’ ability levels; 

•  create  situations  and  select  suitable  questioning  strategies  that  will  provoke  thinking  as  

well as encourage experimentation and creativity; and 

•  respond  to  learners  who  require  extra  help  and  those  who  are  ready  to  take  on  greater  

challenges. 

4.6.2  Working with Learners of Different Levels 

Most  learners  have  considerable  experience  of  fiction  in  various  forms,  have  seen  plenty  of 

films, and through songs have some familiarity with verse. This gives teachers a place to start 

from  and  a  basis  on  which  to  build.  The  skills  needed  for  appreciating  films,  novels  and 

stories  have  much  in  common,  and  are  mutually  reinforcing.  As  learners  learn  to  focus  on 

form,  they  will  be  able  to  transfer  appreciation  and  form-focussed  skills  to  the  reading  of 

prose and verse. Classes can start at different points, concentrate on different initial texts and 

proceed at different speeds according to learner needs. 

If  the  class  contains  learners  of  very  different  standards,  there  are  a  number  of  potential 

solutions. 

Case 1 
One  group  in  the  class  contains  learners  much  less  advanced  as  learners  of  English.  In  this 

case, it might be necessary for them to study different written texts. This will involve creating 

two  groups  in  the  class.  In  some  lessons,  the  teacher  can  spend  part  of  the  time  with  one 

group,  explaining  ideas  and  encouraging  discussion,  and  the  rest  of  the  time  with  the  other 

group. When the teacher is not with a group, its members can prepare presentations, work on 

projects, rehearse performances and complete worksheets. It may be possible for both groups 

to  work  on  the  same  films,  even  if  the  tasks  set  are  rather  different.  Teachers  might  like  to 

75 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

note that: 

 
 
•  Song lyrics may be more approachable than poems; short stories are easier to handle than 

novels; modern plays are simpler than Shakespeare’s. 

•  Less “literary” texts may be more attractive to beginners, e.g. J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit, 
the  works  of  science  fiction  writers  like  Arthur  C.  Clarke  and  Ursula  le  Guin,  R. 

Cormier’s Chocolate War and various detective stories. 

•  Chinua Achebe, Ford Madox Ford, Graham Greene, Ernest Hemingway, Susan Hill, R.K. 
•  Narayan, George Orwell and H.G. Wells often write rather simpler English than some of 

the other authors listed as suitable. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

Case 2 
Here  the  problem  is  not  one  of  language,  but  of  standard  in  more  general  terms  (or  even 

motivation). Everyone in the class can work on the same texts, but different types and levels 

of  task  can  be  set.  Learners  can  write  their  own  critical  appreciations  of  a  poem,  or  can 

answer a series of guided questions. In allocating tasks to different people when watching a 

film,  more  straightforward  ones  can  be  given  to  those  who  find  the  subject  challenging. 

There  can  also  be  more  emphasis  on  work  outside  the  class,  with  learners  able  to  choose 

their  own  texts  and  focus  their  studies  on  aspects  that  interest  them.  Those  who  are 

practically-minded  might  find  making  a  film,  staging  a  drama,  or  designing  a  set  more 

exciting. These are all valid activities in terms of literary study and ultimately draw on the 

same skills. 

Less challenging 

More challenging 

Writing a plot summary 

Analysing symbolism 

Doing background research 

Working on rhythm 

Finding a song to present and analyse  Finding a sonnet to present and analyse 

Writing a fable 

Discussing a character 

Answering questions on a text 

Writing a dramatic monologue 
Examining characterisation 

Writing an unaided critical analysis of a 
text 

Literature  in  English  allows  teachers  a  great  deal  of  freedom  and  flexibility,  which  should 

make the task of responding to the challenges of learner differences relatively less daunting. 

4.7  Meaningful Assignments 

Quality assignments help develop and reinforce learning. Such assignments may include: 

 
 
• 
•  watching films; 

reading set texts; 

 

76 

•  working on creative writing; 
•  performing practical tasks, such as film editing and rehearsing; 
•  doing research and preparing presentations on it; 
•  doing projects; and 
•  writing journals. 
 
 

Feedback  can  be  given  by  teachers  or  peers,  and  learners  presenting  their  assignment  can 

learn  from  the  reactions  of  the  rest  of  the  class  and  from  self-reflection.  While  projects  are 

underway,  verbal  comments  should  suffice,  but  a  larger  piece  of  completed  work  merits  a 

detailed written response, recognising achievement and pointing to areas where improvement 

could be made. 

 

77 

Chapter 5        Assessment 

This chapter discusses the role of assessment in learning and teaching Literature in English, 

the principles that should guide assessment of the subject and the need for  both formative 

and summative assessment. It also provides guidance on internal assessment and details of 

the  public  assessment  of  Literature  in  English.  Finally,  information  is  given  on  how 

standards are established and maintained, and on how results are reported with reference to 

these  standards.  General  guidance  on  assessment  can  be  found  in  the  Senior  Secondary 

Curriculum Guide (SSCG) (CDC, 2006). 

5.1    The Roles of Assessment 

Assessment  is  the  practice  of  collecting  evidence  of  student  learning.  It  is  a  vital  and 

integral part of classroom instruction, and serves several purposes and audiences. 

First  and  foremost,  it  gives  feedback  to  students,  teachers,  schools  and  parents  on  the 

effectiveness of teaching and on students’ strengths and weaknesses in learning. 

Secondly,  it  provides  information  to  schools,  school  systems,  government,  tertiary 

institutions  and  employers  to  enable  them  to  monitor  standards  and  to  facilitate  selection 

decisions. 

The  most  important  role  of  assessment  is  in  promoting  learning  and  monitoring  students’ 

progress.  However,  in  the  senior  secondary  years,  the  more  public  roles  of  assessment  for 

certification  and  selection  come  to  the  fore.  Inevitably,  these  imply  high-stakes  uses  of 

assessment since the results are typically used to make critical decisions about individuals. 

The   Hong   Kong   Diploma   of   Secondary   Education   (HKDSE)   provides   a   common 

end-of-school  credential  that  gives  access  to  university  study,  work  and  further  education 

and  training.  It  summarises  student  performance  in  the  four  core  subjects  and  in  various 

discipline-oriented  subjects  (including  Literature  in  English)  and  the  Applied  Learning 

courses.  It needs to be interpreted in  conjunction  with other information  about students as 

shown in the Student Learning Profile. 

5.2    Formative and Summative Assessment 

It   is   useful   to   distinguish   between   the   two   main   purposes   of   assessment,   namely 

“assessment for learning” and “assessment of learning”. 

78 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 

“Assessment  for  learning”  is  concerned  with  obtaining  feedback  on  learning  and  teaching 

and  utilising  this  to  make  learning  more  effective  and  to  introduce  any  necessary  changes 

to  teaching  strategies.  We  refer  to  this  kind  of  assessment  as  “formative  assessment” 

because  it  is  all  about  forming  or  shaping  learning  and  teaching.  Formative  assessment 

should take place on a daily basis and typically involves close attention to small “chunks” 

of learning. 

“Assessment  of  learning”  is  concerned  with  determining  progress  in  learning,  and  is 

referred  to  as  “summative  assessment”  because  it  is  all  about  summarising  how  much 

learning  has  taken  place.  Summative  assessment  is  normally  undertaken  at  the  conclusion 

of  a  significant  period  of  instruction  (e.g.  at  the  end  of  the  year,  or  of  a  key  stage  of 

schooling) and reviews much larger “chunks” of learning. 

In  practice,  a  sharp  distinction  cannot  always  be  made  between  formative  and  summative 

assessment,  because the  same assessment  can in  some circumstances serve both  formative 

and  summative  purposes.  Teachers  can  refer  to  the  SSGC  for  further  discussion  of 

formative and summative assessment. 

Formative  assessment  should  be  distinguished  from  continuous  assessment.  The  former 

refers  to  the  provision  of  feedback  to  improve  learning  and  teaching  based  on  formal  or 

informal  assessment  of  student  performance,  while  the  latter  refers  to  the  assessment  of 

students’  ongoing  work  and  may  involve  no  provision  of  feedback  that  helps  to 

promote  better  learning  and  teaching.  For  example,  accumulating  results  in  class  tests 

carried  out  on  a  weekly  basis,  without  giving  students  constructive  feedback,  may  neither 

be effective formative assessment nor meaningful summative assessment. 

There  are  good  educational  reasons  why  formative  assessment  should  be  given  more 

attention  and  accorded  a  higher  status  than  summative  assessment,  on  which  schools 

tended to place a greater emphasis in the past. There is research evidence on the beneficial 

effects  of  formative  assessment  when  used  for  refining  instructional  decision-making  in 

teaching  and  generating  feedback  to  improve  learning.  For  this  reason,  the  CDC  report 

Learning  to  Learn  –  The  Way  Forward  in  Curriculum  Development  (CDC,  2001) 

recommended  that  there  should  be  a  change  in  assessment  practices,  with  schools  placing 

due emphasis on formative assessment to make assessment for learning an integral part of 

classroom teaching. 

It  is  recognised,  however,  that  the  primary  purpose  of  public  assessment,  which  includes 

both  public  examinations  and  moderated  School-based  Assessments  (SBA),  is  to  provide 

summative  assessments  of  the  learning  of  each  student.  While  it  is  desirable  that  students 

are exposed to SBA tasks in a low-stakes context, and that they benefit from practice and 

experience with such tasks for formative assessment purposes without penalty, similar tasks 

will  need  to  be  administered  subsequently  as  part  of  the  public  assessment  process  to 

79 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

generate  marks  to  summarise  the  learning  of  students  (i.e.  for  summative  assessment 

purposes). 

Another  distinction  to  be  made  is  between  internal  assessment  and  public  assessment. 

Internal assessment refers to the assessment practices that teachers and schools employ as 

part  of  the  ongoing  learning  and  teaching  process  during  the  three  years  of  senior 

secondary  studies.  In  contrast,  public  assessment  refers  to  the  assessment  conducted  as 

part of the assessment process in place for all schools. Within the context of the HKDSE, 

this  means  both  the  public  examinations  and  the  moderated  SBAs  conducted  or 

supervised  by  the  HKEAA.  On  balance,  internal  assessment  should  be  more  formative, 

whereas  public  assessment  tends  to  be  more  summative.  Nevertheless,  this  need  not  be 

seen as a simple dichotomy. The inclusion of SBA in public assessment is an attempt to 

enhance  formative  assessment  or  assessment  for  learning  within  the  context  of  the 

HKDSE. 

5.3    Assessment Objectives 

The  assessment  objectives  are  closely  aligned  with  the  curriculum  framework  and  the 

broad learning outcomes which are presented in Chapter 2 of this Guide. 
 
5.4    Internal Assessment 

This  section  presents  the  guiding  principles  that  can  be  used  as  the  basis  for  designing 

internal  assessment  and  some  common  assessment  practices  for  Literature  in  English 

for  use    in    schools.    Some    of    these    principles    are    common    to    both    internal    and  

public assessment. 

5.4.1   Guiding Principles 

Internal  assessment  practices  should  be  aligned  with  curriculum  planning,  teaching 

progression,  student  abilities  and  local  school  contexts.  The  information  collected  will 

help  motivate,  promote  and  monitor  student  learning,  and  will  also  help  teachers  to  find 

ways of promoting more effective learning and teaching. 

(a)    Alignment with the learning objectives 
A  range  of  assessment  practices  should  be  used  to  assess  the  achievement  of  different 

learning  objectives  for  whole-person  development.  These  include  teacher  assessment,  self-

assessment  and  peer  assessment  and  involve  the  use  of  discussions,  presentations, 

performances,  essays,  projects,  portfolios  and  written  classwork.  The  weighting  given  to 

different  areas  in  assessment  should  be  discussed  and  agreed  among  teachers.  The 

assessment purposes and criteria should also be made known to learners so that they have a 

full understanding of what is expected of them. 

80 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

(b)    Catering for the range of student ability 
Assessment practices incorporating different levels of difficulty and diverse modes should be 

used to cater for learners with different aptitudes and abilities. This helps to ensure that the 

more  able  learners  are  challenged  to  develop  their  full  potential  and  the  less  able  ones  are 

encouraged to sustain their interest and succeed in learning. 

(c)    Tracking progress over time 
As  internal  assessment  should  not  be  a  one-off  exercise,  schools  are  encouraged  to  use 

practices  that  can  track  learning  progress  over  time  (e.g.  portfolios).  Assessment  practices 

of this kind allow learners to set their own incremental targets and manage their own pace 

of learning, which will have a positive impact on their commitment to learning. 

(d)    Timely and encouraging feedback 
Teachers should provide timely and encouraging feedback, through a variety of means such 

as  constructive  verbal  comments  during  classroom  activities  and  written  remarks  on 

assignments.  Such  feedback  helps  learners  sustain  their  momentum  in  learning,  and  to 

identify their strengths and weaknesses. 

(e)     Making reference to the school’s context 
As learning is more meaningful when the content or process is linked to a setting which is 

familiar to learners, schools are encouraged to design assessment tasks that make reference 

to the school’s own context (e.g. its location, relationship with the community, and mission). 

(f)     Making reference to current progress in student learning 
Internal  assessment  tasks  should  be  designed  with  reference  to  learners’  current  progress, 

as this helps to overcome obstacles that may have a cumulative negative impact on learning. 

Teachers  should  be  mindful  in  particular  of  concepts  and  skills  which  form  the  basis  for 

further development in learning. 

(g)     Encouraging peer assessment and self-assessment 
In  addition  to  giving  their  feedback,  teachers  should  also  provide  opportunities  for  peer 

assessment  and  self-assessment  in  student  learning.  The  former  enables  students  to  learn 

among  themselves,  and  the  latter  promotes  reflective  thinking  which  is  vital  for  students’ 

lifelong learning. 

(h)    Appropriate use of assessment information to provide feedback 
Internal assessment provides a rich source of data for providing evidence-based feedback on 

learning in a formative manner. 

81 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

5.4.2   Internal Assessment Practices 
 
 

A  range  of  assessment  practices  suited  to  the  Literature  in  English  subject,  such  as 

discussions, presentations, performances, essays, projects, portfolios and written classwork, 

should  be  used  to  promote  the  attainment  of  the  various  learning  outcomes.  However,  

teachers should note that these practices should be an integral part of learning and teaching, 

not “add-on” activities. 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

Discussions 
After reading/viewing a text, learners can discuss any aspects suggested by the teacher or 

the learners themselves (e.g. how the theme of racial discrimination is presented in To Kill 

a  Mockingbird).  Occasionally  such  discussions  can  be  formal,  timed  and  assessed.  An 

alternative  way  of  conducting  discussions  is  to  ask  learners  to  role-play  characters  or 

authors  and  answer  classmates’  questions  –  but  this  can  be  used  for  assessment  only  if 

everyone gets a chance to do so during the year. 

Presentations 
These usually involve a learner, or a group of learners, explaining a poem or talking about 

some aspects of a text, etc. to the rest of the class. 

Performances 
These  can  take  a  variety  of  forms,  and  learners  may  be  given  a  choice  of,  for  example: 

reciting  a  poem,  giving  a  dramatic  reading  of  a  scene  from  a  short  story  or  novel,  or 

performing a short extract from a play. 

Essays 

These  are  usually  done  as  homework,  but  can  also  be  written  under  time  restrictions  in 

class or in an examination. 

Projects 
These are extended pieces of work, which may include conventional written work as well 

as work presented in video/audio or artwork form. Learners should consult the teacher on 

the  length  and  choice  of  topic  for  the  work  they  intend  to  produce  and  on  the  mode  of 

presentation. 

82 

Collections of learners’ work 
These  comprise  the  work  that  learners  have  done  throughout  the  three  years  of  literature 

study,  and  may  include  creative  work,  critical  appreciations  or  essays  (or  a  mixture  of 

these).  Learners  may  be  asked  to  select  their  own  favourite  pieces  of  work  for  internal 

assessment. Teachers may wish to see drafts as well as finished pieces in a portfolio. Apart  

from    participating    in    the    selection    of    portfolio    content,    learners    should    be 

encouraged   to   reflect   on   their   learning   progress,   evaluate   their   own   strengths   and 

weaknesses, and identify ways of improving. 

Written classwork 
Learners  may,  for  instance,  answer  questions  about  a  poem,  compare  two  pieces  of 

writing,  write  a  critical  appreciation,  comment  on  an  extract  from  a  set  text,  or  provide 

imaginative  expansions  of  a  text  –  for  example,  by  adapting  part  of  a  set  text  for  a 
different medium, or writing an alternative ending or additional scenes. 

83 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 

5.5    Public Assessment 

5.5.1   Guiding Principles 

Some principles guiding public assessment are outlined below for teachers’ reference. 

(a)    Alignment with the curriculum 
The  outcomes  that  are  assessed  and  examined  through  the  HKDSE  Examination  should  be 

aligned  with  the  aims,  objectives  and  intended  learning  outcomes  of  the  three-year  senior 

secondary  curriculum.  To  enhance  the  validity  of  public  assessment,  the  assessment 

procedures should address  the range of valued learning outcomes, and not  just those that are 

assessable through external written examinations. 

The   public   assessment   for   Literature   in   English   centres   on   the   comprehension   and 

appreciation  of  literary  texts  and  the  ability  to  write  essays  based  on  the  set  texts.  It  will, 

starting  from  2019,  also  include  a    school-based    assessment    component    which    aims    to  

cover  a  more  extensive  range  of learning outcomes than is possible in external examination 

settings, as well as to encourage independent study. 

(b)   Fairness, objectivity and reliability 
Students  should  be  assessed  in  ways  that  are  fair  and  that  are  not  biased  against  particular 

groups  of  students.  A  characteristic  of  fair  assessment  is  that  it  is  objective  and  under  the 

control  of  an  independent  examining  authority  that  is  impartial  and  open  to  public  scrutiny. 

Fairness    also    implies    that    assessments    provide    a    reliable    measure    of    each    student’s 

performance in a given subject so that, if they were to be repeated, very similar results would 

be  obtained.  These  issues  are  addressed  in  Literature  in  English  by  such  means  as  the 

provision of detailed marking criteria, marker training, and scrutiny by the Chief Examiner. 

(c)   Inclusiveness 
T he  assessments and examinations in the HKDSE need to accommodate the full spectrum of 

student aptitude and ability. 

The  questions  in  the  Literature  in  English  examination  papers  range  from  straightforward, 

guided  analysis  of  short  extracts  of  prose,  drama  or  poetry  to  more  demanding  essay-type 

questions on a single text or multiple texts requiring sophisticated skills of comparison. Please 

refer to sections 5.5.2 and 5.5.3, and Appendix 4 for details. 

(d)   Standards-referencing 
The  reporting  system  is  “standards-referenced”,  i.e.  student  performance  is  matched  against 

standards,  which  indicate  what  students  have  to  know  and  be  able  to  do  to  merit  a  certain 

level  of  performance.  An  overall  level  for  the  subject,  inclusive  of  both  the  examination 

papers  and  the  portfolio/SBA  component,  is  reported,  accompanied  by  a  set  of  level 

descriptors. 

84 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

(e)    Informativeness 
The  HKDSE  qualification  and  the  associated  assessment  and  examinations  system  provides 

useful information to all parties. Firstly, it provides feedback to students on their performance 

and  to  teachers  and  schools  on  the  quality  of  the  teaching  provided.  Secondly,  it 

communicates to parents, tertiary institutions, employers and the public at large what it is that 

students know and are able to do, in terms of how their performance matches the standards. 

Thirdly, it facilitates selection decisions that are fair and defensible. 

5.5.2 Assessment Design 

The  assessment  is  subject  to  continual  refinement  in  the  light  of  feedback  from  live 

examinations.  Full  details  are  provided  in  the  Regulations  and  Assessment  Frameworks  for 

the  year of the examination and other supplementary documents, which are available on the 

HKEAA website (www.hkeaa.edu.hk/en/hkdse/assessment/assessment_framework/). 

For the 2012 – 2015 HKDSE Examinations 

Component 

Public 

examination 

 

 

Paper 1  Appreciation 

Paper 2  Essay writing 

 

 

 

Portfolio  

 
 
For the 2016 HKDSE Examination onwards 

Component 

Public 

examination 

 

 

Paper 1  Essay writing 

Paper 2  Appreciation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Weighting 

30% 

50% 

20% 

Weighting 

50% 

30% 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Duration 

2½  hours 

3 hours 

Duration 

3 hours 

2 hours 

Portfolio (2016 - 2018) / School-based Assessment* (2019 

20% 

onwards) 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

*The  implementation  of  School-based  Assessment  (SBA)  in  Literature  in  English  will  be 

postponed  to  the  2019  HKDSE  Examination.   SBA  takes  the  form  of  portfolio  work,  the 

details  of  which  are  provided  in  section  5.5.4.  For  the  2016  to  2018  HKDSE  Examinations, 

students’  portfolio  work  is  collected  and  marked  by  the  HKEAA.  Starting  from  t h e   2019 

HKDSE  Examination,  SBA  will  be  fully  implemented.  The  portfolio    work    will    be    marked  

by  the  students’  own  teachers  and  their  marks  will  be submitted to the HKEAA. Teachers 

should  refer  to  the  Regulations  and  Assessment  Frameworks  published  by  the  HKEAA  for 

details. 

 

85 

5.5.3   Public Examinations 

2012 – 2015 HKDSE Examinations 
 
Two sets of texts will be available for candidates to choose from for their studies. 
 
Paper 1    Appreciation    (2½  hours)   (30%) 

This paper is divided into three sections. Candidates must choose one question (from two) in 

each of the three sections. 

Multi-part questions invite critical analyses and/or comparisons of: 

• 

one or two passages from the set texts for fiction or drama in Section A; 

•      two or three set poems either by the same or different poets in Section B; and 

•      one or two unseen poems in Section C. 

Paper 2    Essay writing    (3 hours)    (50%) 

This paper is divided into two parts. Part I consists of four sections, A – D, covering a single 

prose, film, short fiction and drama text respectively. There are two questions in each section. 

Part  II  comprises eight questions requiring comparisons of two or more  of the set texts from 

Part  I.  Candidates  must  answer  three  questions  from  the  paper  as  a  whole,  two  from  Part  I 

(taken  from  different  sections)  and  one  from  Part  II,  which  must  deal  with  genres  the 

candidate  has  not  already  covered  in  Part  I.  All  questions  will  require  essay-type  answers, 

except those inviting imaginative expansion of texts.  

Paper 3 
 

Portfolio 

(20%) 

The portfolio component of Literature in English constitutes 20% of the total weighting for the 

subject. It involves the preparation of an extended essay on a theme/work/writer connected to 

the  learner’s  study  in  the  subject  OR  an  analytical  study/review  of  a  film/play/performance, 

OR (a) piece(s) of creative writing, of around 2000 to 2500 words in total. 

2016 HKDSE Examination onwards 
 

Candidates choose one of the two novels, one of the two plays and one of the two films in a 

single list of set texts for their studies. All candidates study the same list of poems and short 

stories. 

 

Paper 1   Essay Writing    (3 hours)   (50%) 
 

This  paper  is  divided  into  two  parts.  Part  I  comprises  four  sections,  A  –  D.  Candidates  may 

86 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

choose to answer a question on one of two novels in Section A, one of two plays in Section B, 

and one of two films in Section C. Section D covers a selection of short stories. In Part I there 

are two questions on each text. Part II comprises eight questions requiring comparisons of two 

or more of the set texts from Part I. Candidates must answer three questions from the paper as 

a  whole,  two  from  Part  I  (taken  from  different  sections)  and  one  from  Part  II,  which  must 

cover the genres the candidate has not already covered in Part I. All questions require essay-

type answers, except those inviting imaginative expansion of texts.  

 

Paper 2   Appreciation    (2 hours)   (30%) 
 

This paper is divided into 3 sections. Candidates must choose one question from a choice of 

four  in  Section  A,  one  question  from  a  choice  of  two  in  Section  B  and  one  question  from  a 

choice  of  two  in  Section  C.  Multi-part  questions  invite  critical  analyses  of  a  single  passage 

from  either  of  the  prescribed  novels  or  the  prescribed  plays  in  Section  A,  two  or  three  set 

poems  either  by  the  same  or  different  poets  in  Section  B,  and  one  or  two  unseen  poems  in 

Section C. Candidates are expected to show an ability to understand the thought and feeling in 

the poetry, and the ways in which these are conveyed. The texts of the set and unseen poems 

are included in the question paper.  

 
Paper 3   Portfolio (up to 2018) / SBA (from 2019)  (20%) 
 

The portfolio/SBA component of Literature in English involves the preparation of an extended 

essay on a theme/work/writer connected to the learner’s study in the subject OR an analytical 

study/review of a film/play/performance, OR (a) piece(s) of creative writing, of around 2000 

to 2500 words in total.  

 

Schools  may  refer  to  the  sample  and  live  examination  papers  regarding  the  format  of  the 

examination and the standards at which the questions are pitched. 

                         

5.5.4   School-based Assessment (SBA) 

In  the  context  of  public  assessment,  SBA refers  to  assessments  administered  in  schools  and 

marked by the students’ own teachers. The primary rationale for SBA in Literature in English 

is to enhance the validity of the overall assessment and extend it to include a more extensive 

range of learning outcomes through employing assessment modes that are not all possible in 

external examination settings. 

SBA  involves  tasks  which  require  learners  to  demonstrate  a  range  of  skills  related  to  the 

study  of  literature  and  the  arts  in  the  world  beyond  the  classroom,  to  develop  the  ability  to 

work  independently  and  to  adapt  and  improve  on  successive  drafts  as  a  result  of  teachers’ 

feedback.  SBA  may  also  help  prepare  learners  for  the  other  components  of  the  public 

examination. 

87 

 

 

 

There are, however, some additional reasons for SBA in Literature in English. For example, it 

reduces  dependence  on the two public examination papers,  which are not intended to assess 

extended  pieces  of  writing  or  research  skills.  Assessments  based  on  student  performance 

over an extended period of time and developed by those who know the students best – their 

subject teachers – provide a more reliable assessment of each student. 

Another  reason  for  including  SBA  is  to  promote  a  positive  “backwash  effect”  on  students, 

teachers  and  school  staff.  Within  Literature  in  English,  SBA can  serve  to  motivate  students 

by  requiring  them  to  engage  in  meaningful  activities  that  lead  to  a  more  comprehensive 

assessment of their performance; and for teachers, it can reinforce curriculum aims and good 

teaching  practice,  and  provide  structure  and  significance  to  an  activity  they  are  in  any  case 

involved in on a daily basis, namely assessing their own students. 

The  SBA  component  of  Literature  in  English,  which  has  a  weighting  of  20%  of  the  total 

assessment  for 

the  subject, 

involves 

the  preparation  of  an  extended  essay  on  a 

theme/work/writer connected to  learners’ study in the subject OR  an analytical  study/review 

of a film/play/performance, OR (a) piece(s) of creative work, of around 2000 to 2500 words.  

The portfolio should be submitted at the end of S6. 

It should be noted that SBA is not an “add-on” element in the curriculum. The modes of SBA 

above  are  normal  in-class  and  out-of-class  activities  suggested  in  the  curriculum.  The 

requirement  to  implement  the  SBA  will  take  into  consideration  the  wide  range  of  student 

ability and efforts will be made to avoid unduly increasing the workload of both teachers and 

students.  Detailed  information  on  the  requirements  and  implementation  of  the  SBA  and 

samples of assessment tasks will be provided to teachers by the HKEAA. 

 

Implementation  of  SBA  in  Literature  in  English  will  be  postponed  to  the  2019  HKDSE 

Examination.  This  will  allow  sufficient  time  for  schools  to  get  familiar  with  the  revised 

curriculum and assessment arrangements as well as the conduct of the SBA. Schools can opt 

to submit SBA marks for feedback from the HKEAA in the optional trial to be implemented 

in the 2018 HKDSE Examination. 

 
 

88 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

5.5.5   Standards and Reporting of Results 
 
 
Standards-referenced  reporting  is  adopted  for  the  HKDSE.  What  this  means  is  that 

candidates’  levels  of  performance  are  reported  with  reference  to  a  set  of  standards    as  

defined   by   cut   scores   on   the   mark   scale   for   a   given   subject. Standards-referencing 

relates  to  the  way  in  which  results  are  reported  and  does  not  involve  any  changes  in  how 

teachers  or  examiners  mark  students’  work.  The  set  of  standards  for  a  given subject  can be 
represented diagrammatically as shown in Figure 5.1. 

 

 

 
Within the context of the HKDSE there are five cut scores, which are used to distinguish five 

levels of performance (1–5), with 5 being the highest. A performance below the cut score for 

Level 1 is labelled as “Unclassified” (U). 
 
For  each  of  the  five  levels,  a  set  of  written  descriptors  has been  developed  to  describe  what 

the  typical  candidate  performing  at  this  level  is  able  to  do.  The  principle  behind  these 

descriptors  is  that  they  describe  what  typical  candidates  can  do,  not  what  they  cannot  do.  In 

other  words,  they  describe  performance  in  positive  rather  than  negative  terms.  These 

descriptors  represent  “on-average”  statements  and  may  not  apply  precisely  to  individuals, 

whose performance within a subject may be variable and span two or more levels. Samples of 

students’ work at various levels of attainment are provided to illustrate the standards  expected 

of  them.  These  samples,  when  used  together  with  the  level  descriptors,  will  clarify  the 

standards expected at the various levels of attainment. 
 
In  setting  standards  for  the  HKDSE,  Levels  4  and  5  are  set  with  reference  to  the  standards 

achieved  by  students  awarded  grades  A–D  in  the  HKALE.    It  needs  to  be  stressed,  however, 

that  the  intention  is  that  the  standards  will  remain  constant  over  time  –  not  the  percentages 

awarded  different  levels,  as  these  are  free  to  vary  in  line  with  variations  in  overall  student 

performance. Referencing Levels 4 and 5 to the standards associated with the old grades A–D 

is  important  for  ensuring  a  degree  of  continuity  with  past  practice,  for  facilitating  tertiary 

selection and for maintaining international recognition. 

 

The  overall  level  awarded  to  each  candidate  will  be  made  up  of  results  in  both  the  public 

examination and the SBA. SBA results for Literature in English will be moderated based on the 

 

89 

judgement  of  panels  of  external  moderators  through  the  inspection  of  samples  of  students’ 

work. 

 

To  provide  finer  discrimination  for  selection  purposes,  the  Level  5  candidates  with  the  best 

performance have their results annotated with the symbols ** and the next top group with the 

symbol *. The HKDSE certificate itself records the Level awarded to each candidate.  
 
 

 

90 

(Blank  page) 

 

91 

Chapter 6   Effective Use of Learning and Teaching Resources 

This  chapter  discusses  the  importance  of  selecting  and  making  effective  use  of  learning  and 

teaching resources, including the set texts, to enhance student learning. Schools need to adapt 

and, where appropriate, develop the relevant resources to support student learning. 

6.1   Purpose and Function of Learning and Teaching Resources 

Appropriate learning and teaching materials help learners to develop their literary knowledge 

and  skills,  generic  skills,  and  positive  values  and attitudes. They also  help  broaden  learners’ 

learning  experience  and  enlarge  their  perspectives  and  cultural  understanding.  The  learning 

and  teaching  materials  that  function  most  effectively  are  those  that  suit  the  learners’  needs, 

interests and abilities. 

6.2   Guiding Principles 

When selecting set texts, teachers should take into account: 

•        learners’ interests and abilities; 

•        the appropriateness of the content; 

•        the length of the work; and 

•        the difficulty of the language. 

6.3   Types of Resources 

6.3.1   Set Texts 

Teachers should consider the following when using set texts: 

•        Design useful and appropriate learning tasks and activities to 

– 

– 

ensure a balanced coverage of the learning targets and objectives; and 

cater for the learners’ needs, interests and abilities. 

• 

Design extended tasks or projects to encourage wider and independent reading/viewing, 

and critical exploration of literary texts. 

A list  of  works  is  provided  in  Appendix  5.  Teachers  might  like  to  refer  to  it  when  selecting 

and  using  supplementary  materials  to  increase  learners’ literary  exposure  and  their  skills  of 

literary comprehension and appreciation. 

92 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

6.3.2   Other Resource Materials 

 
 

Apart  from  the  set  texts,  teachers  should  make  use  of  other  resource  materials  to  enhance 

learning. There is a wealth of readily available material that can be adapted to the teaching of 

Literature in English, e.g. 

 
 
•  Film and book reviews in newspapers; 
•  Literary and film magazines; 
•  Television programming (films, critics, discussions, etc.); 
•  The BBC World Service (http://www.bbc.co.uk/worldservice/ – mainly drama 

productions), and BBC Radio 3 (http://www.bbc.co.uk/radio3/ – poetry, talks and 

drama); 

•  Short story competitions sponsored by various organisations; 
•  Cultural  activities  organised  by  such  bodies  as  the  Hong  Kong  Arts  Centre,  the  Hong 
Kong  Film  Archive,  the  Academy  for  Performing  Arts,  and  the  Leisure  and  Cultural 

Services Department; 

•  Commercial cinema, and resource materials in public libraries and bookshops; and 
•  Learning  and  teaching  resource  packages  produced  by  the  Education 

Bureau. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

The  school  library  should  be  encouraged  to  develop  a  collection  of  poetry,  short  story 

anthologies,  novels  and  plays  as  a  resource  for  teachers  and  learners.  The  acquisition  of 

relevant published study notes/guides and works of literary criticism can commence as soon 

as  the  librarian  has  the  titles  of  the  set  texts.  Consideration  should  be  given  to  the 

establishment  of  a  literature  corner  where  all  the  materials  can  be  assembled  for  ease  of 

reference.  Also,  learners  can  be  encouraged  to  deposit  copies  of  their  creative  writing, 

projects  and  portfolios  in  the  library.  If  school  resources  allow,  the  annual  publication  of  a 

literary magazine may be another way of sharing and celebrating the learners’ achievements. 

6.3.3   The Internet and Other Technologies 

Informational  technology  (IT)  is  an  effective  tool  for  enhancing  the  study  of  literature.  The 

Internet,  for  instance,  is  a  powerful  resource  that  can  be  exploited  for  this  purpose  –  for 

example, for searching for information for a project, accessing online literature resources, and 

visiting  interactive  websites  and  virtual  classrooms  for  pleasurable  self-access  learning. 

Teachers  may  also  consider  using  multi-media  resources  and  IT  tools  such  as  e-books  and 

educational CD-ROMs to enhance learners’ motivation and extend their learning experience. 

However,  given their range in terms of quality  and accessibility, care should be exercised in 

the choice of these materials. Good multi-media and IT resources should: 

•        involve good models of English use; 

•        be  designed  in  a  user-friendly  way,  with  graphics,  sound  and  animation  designed  to 

93 

increase learners’ motivation and support learning; and 

• 

promote interactive learning by  encouraging  learner contributions, allowing learners to 

work at their own pace and providing feedback to them. 

6.3.4   Community Resources 

Many  parties  in  the  community  can  facilitate  life-wide  learning  by  providing  learners  with 

authentic  learning  experiences,  professional  services  and  facilities.  Teachers  are  encouraged 

to explore learning opportunities available in the community and work in partnership with the 

following parties: 

Community 

organisations, 

government 

departments 

and 

non-government 

organisations 

These  organisations  and  departments  offer  a  wide  range  of  programmes,  services  and 

activities that provide opportunities for life-wide learning. Schools should encourage learners 

to   visit   museums,   libraries,   film   archives   and   resource   centres,   watch   shows   and 

performances,  read  extensively  and  browse  websites  to  enrich  their  learning  experience  and 

enhance their study of Literature in English. 

Parents 

Parental  involvement  in  their  children’s  education  contributes  greatly  to  their  academic, 

social and emotional growth. Schools should establish regular communication with parents to 

solicit their support for their children’s study of Literature in English as well as to invite them 

to become volunteer partners in organising related activities. 

Alumni 

Schools  are  encouraged  to  utilise  their  alumni’s  expertise  and  resources  in  supporting 

learning and teaching by inviting them to share their learning experiences or provide services 

and resources. 

Employers 

Employers’  support  may  be  sought  for  sponsoring  learning  activities  or  funding  award  and 

scholarship schemes related to Literature in English. Learners should be encouraged to make 

use  of  these  opportunities  and  participate  in  activities  which  enhance  their  study  of  the 

subject. 

94 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

6.4   Flexible Use of Learning and Teaching Resources 

Learning and teaching resources should be used flexibly in order to cater for learners’ diverse 

needs,  interests  and  abilities.  Through  careful  selection,  adaptation  and  development  of 

materials,  teachers  can  provide  many  opportunities  for  learning  in  which  the  more  able 

learners  are  challenged  and  the  less  able  ones  are  supported  and  guided.  For  instance, 

opportunities  for  independent  inquiry  can  be  increased  for  the  more  able  learners,  while  the 

less  able  ones  can  be  given  supplementary  background  information  or  language  input  for 

completing learning tasks and activities. 

Teachers  are  encouraged  to  exercise  their  professional  judgement  in  deciding  how  best  to 

make  use  of  learning  and  teaching  resources  to  suit  learners’  interests  and  learning  styles. 

Teachers  can,  for  instance,  adjust  the  input  or  output  of  learning  tasks  to  enable  learners  to 

learn  more  effectively.  For  more  specific  examples  of  how  learning  and  teaching  resources 

can be used flexibly, please refer to section 4.6. 

6.5  Resource Management 

Sound  resource  management  is  one  of  the  key  factors  for  effective  implementation  of  the 

three-year  senior  secondary  Literature  in  English  curriculum.  To  achieve  this,  teachers  are 

encouraged to work closely with the school librarian to: 

•  produce  strategic  plans  for  the  procurement  and  development  of  resource  materials 

based on the needs of the school; 

•  accumulate  resource  materials  over  time  and  develop  an  efficient  storage  system  that 

allows easy access and retrieval; 

•  establish  an  inventory  system  that  ensures  easy  expansion  and  writing-off  of  resource 

materials; and 

•  devise a review mechanism for evaluating existing resources to further support learning, 

teaching and curriculum development. 

95 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Appendix 1 

Examples of Text Sets 

Set 1 

Film 

In the Heat of the Night (N. Jewison, 1967) 

Play 

W. Shakespeare: Macbeth 

Novel 

J. Austen: Sense and Sensibility 

Short Stories   (From  Shackleton,  M.  (Ed.).  (1989).  Further  Recollections.  London: 

Longman) 

S. Barstow: 

One of the Virtues 

R. Dahl: 

Lamb to the Slaughter 

G. Greene: 

A Shocking Accident 

S. Hill: 

How Soon Can I Leave? 

K. Mansfield: 

 Miss Brill 

W.S. Maugham:  The Verger 

H.H. Munro: 

The Story-Teller 

F. O’Connor: 

The Man of the House 

M. Spark: 

J. Thurber: 

You Should Have Seen the Mess 

The Catbird Seat 

Poetry 

(From Heaney, S. & Hughes, T. (Eds.). (1982). The Rattle Bag. London: Faber 

and Faber.) 

W. Blake: 

Auguries of Innocence (p.47); The Garden of Love (p.175); 

The Sick Rose (p.389); The Tyger (p.444). 

J. Clare: 

Badger (p.57); Hares at Play (p.184); Mouse’s Nest (p.299). 

T. Hardy: 

Beeny Cliff (p.67); Channel Firing (p.103); The House of 

Hospitalities (p.195). 

G.M. Hopkins:   Binsey Poplars (p.77); Moonrise (p.292); Pied Beauty (p.344); 

Windhover (p.468). 

W. Owen: 

Exposure  (p.145);   Futility  (p.170);  The  Send-Off  (p.374); 

Strange Meeting (p.407). 

96 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Set 2 

Film 

The Joy Luck Club (W. Wang, 1993) 

Play 

T. Stoppard: The Real Inspector Hound 

Novel 

W. Golding: The Lord of the Flies 

Short Stories   (From  Gwynn,  R.S.  (Ed.).  (2005).  Fiction:  A  Pocket  Anthology  (Penguin 

Academic Series) 4th ed. New York: Pearson Longman.) 
C. Achebe: 

Dead Men’s Path 

R. Carver: 

L. Erdrich: 

Cathedral 

The Red Convertible 

G.G. Marquez: 

A Very Old Man with Enormous Wings 

C.P. Gilman: 

The Yellow Wallpaper 

E. Hemingway:  Hills Like White Elephants 

A. Munro: 

E.A. Poe: 

How I Met My Husband 

The Cask of Amontillado 

J. Steinback: 

The Chrysanthemums 

A. Walker: 

Everyday Use 

Poetry 

(From Heaney, S. & Hughes, T. (Eds.). (1982). The Rattle Bag. London: Faber 

and Faber.) 

W. Auden: Stop All the Clocks (p.406); This Lunar Beauty (p.428); The 

Wanderer (p.454). 

E. Bishop: The Bight (p.76); The Fish (p.153); Sandpiper (p.363). 

R. Frost:  Birches (p.78); Gathering Leaves (p.176); Stopping by Woods on a 

Snowy Evening (p.407). 

P. Larkin:   At Grass (p.45); Cut Grass (p.119); Days (p.121); Seventy Feet 

Down (p.376). 

S. Plath:  Crossing the Water (p.117); Mushrooms (p.299); Pheasant (p.342); 

Poppies in July (p.351); You’re (p.474). 

97 

 
 
 

 
 

 

Examples of Poetry Analysis 

Appendix 2 

Example 1 (simple) 

************************************************************************* 

Dreams by Langston Hughes 

(It has not been possible to reproduce the text here, although every effort has 
been  made  to  seek  copyright  permission.  Teachers  might  like  to  access  the 
poem at the website: www.poets.org) 

************************************************************************* 

In this simple lyric the poet tells us not to lose our dreams. It is a common experience that the 

hopes  we  have  when  young  –  the  perfect  marriage,  the  life  devoted  to  good,  being  able  to 

make  a  difference  to  the  world  –  often  end  in  disappointment  and  disillusion.  The  poet 

advises us not to give in to this. As long as we keep our dreams, to use the metaphors of the 

poem, we can fly and something of worth can grow from our lives. 

The  poem  consists  of  two  verses  of  four  lines  each,  comprising  one  sentence,  and  rhyming 

a/b/c/b. The lines have four syllables, except for the third line of each verse. These lines warn 

us of the negative effects of letting our dreams die and are, accordingly, unmetrical. One can 

almost  feel  the  bird  running  along  dragging  its  useless  wing  on  the  ground.  The  rhyme  and 

alliteration (“dreams die”, “field frozen”) show the beauty of the dreams, though they are as 

fragile and easily disrupted as the poem. The ending of the poem on the image of winter and 

the  rhyme  “snow”  add  sadness.  It  suggests  it  is  not  easy  to  keep  the  dreams  alive;  it  is 

perhaps easier to despair. 

98 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 2 (simple) 

************************************************************************* 

Blessing the Boats (at St. Mary’s) by Lucille Clifton 

(It  has  not  been  possible  to  reproduce  the  text  here,  although  every  effort  has 
been  made  to  seek  copyright  permission.  Teachers  might  like  to  access  the 
poem at the website: www.poets.org) 

************************************************************************* 

The  poem is  in  the  form  of  a  wish  or  prayer  (given  the  religious  connotations  of  “blessing” 

and  even  the  name  of  the  place  “St  Mary’s”).  The  poet  keeps  everything  very  simple,  with 

everyday  words,  mainly  monosyllabic,  and  no  punctuation  marks  perhaps  to  stress  the  flow 

of   the   water,   without   roughness,   and   the   “innocence”   the   poet   wishes   for   the 

addressee/subject of the prayer. The main image (detailed enough to be thought of as a symbol) 

is of a boat setting sail. The poem makes it clear that this represents a relationship (“the lip of 

our understanding”). This then gives the words “kiss” and “love” double force as both sailing 

metaphors and descriptions of emotions. 

In sailing terms, the tide is enabling the boat to go out to sea smoothly, so  there need be no 

fear. The wind has to blow from behind to fill the sails. The sailor should trust the wind and 

accept the service, just looking ahead across the sea. When we are with people we trust we do 

not have to “watch our back”. In emotional terms, the poem is about love and trust helping us 

to progress through life (from “this to that” without rocks or shoals/painful experiences). 

The poem  is decorated  with alliteration (“face of  fear”,  “water, water waving”  and “through 

this  to  that”),  the  lovely  pattern  of  “entering  even”,  and  body  imagery  (lip,  face,  kiss,  back, 

eyes). It is interesting that the poet chooses not to repeat the pattern 

may the tide 

may you kiss 

but  moves  the  next  two  “may”s  further  into  the  line.  Possibly  she  feels  the  pattern  would 

become too rigid and harm the graceful flow of the poem. 

99 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 3 (more advanced) 

************************************************************************* 

Dusting (from Magnificat) by Marilyn Nelson 

(Permission to reproduce the poem has been obtained for the print version of 
this  Guide  only.  Teachers  might  like  to  access  the  poem  at  the  website: 
www.poets.org) 

************************************************************************* 

The Magnificat is an ancient hymn of praise to God for all the wonders of creation. Here the 

poet finds glory even in dust. The title and the third stanza give us the situation of the poem: 

the simple act of dusting as part of the housework. The sunlight catches the motes of dust in a 

“ladder  of  light”,  like  a  biblical  vision  of  angels  ascending  to and  descending  from  Heaven. 

The movement of the poet’s arms becomes a gesture of worship. 

The associations of dust are negative: dirt, dryness, neglect and death, yet the poet sees it in a 

quite different light. In the first stanza, the poet brings a knowledge of modern science to bear 

on  dust.  We  see  it  and  its  constituents  as  it  might  appear  under  a  microscope.  The 

connotations  of  viruses  are  also  highly  negative,  but  here  we  are  reminded  of  their  beauty 

(like a pearl necklace). Dust does not only have beauty, but it is part of the biosphere, the web 

of  life,  an  essential  part  of  Earth’s  ecology  (stanza  2).  Ironically,  this  symbol  of  dryness  is 

essential to the production of rain; it is a seed of life (stanza 3). 

Suitably,  the  poem  has  short  lines  and  short  stanzas,  though  there  are  plenty  of  long  words. 

The individual particles of dust may be highly complex. The diction is in fact rather technical 

and  scientific,  to  help  us  to  consider  dust  in  a  new  way.  Small  “i”  sounds  of  various  types 

dominate the first verse, and can be found scattered through the other two. As part of this, one 

can  note  the  choice  of  “in-”  words:  infinite,  intricate,  inseparable,  infernal.  To  add  to  the 

sense  of  delicate  beauty,  the  first  two  stanzas  are  rich  in  “p”  sounds:  particles,  pearl, 

protozoans,  shapes,  sub-microscopic,  spores  (twice),  cooperation,  spreading,  inseparable  and 

pole.  The  extra  long  line  “mutual  genetic  cooperation”  (11  syllables)  mimics  the  act  of 

working together. The final stanza stresses “l” sounds: circles, climbs, ladder of light, infernal, 

endless  and  eternal  (the  phonetically  closely  connected  “r”  sound  is  also  involved  in  this 

effect). The poem ends neatly in a two-syllable, two-word phrase: For dust. 

100 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 4 (more advanced) 

************************************************************************* 

The Garden of Love 

I went to the Garden of Love, 
And saw what I never had seen: 
A Chapel was built in the midst, 
Where I used to play on the green. 

And the gates of this Chapel were shut, 
And “Thou shalt not” writ over the door; 
So I turn’d to the Garden of Love 
That so many sweet flowers bore. 

And I saw it was filled with graves, 
And tomb-stones where flowers should be: 
And Priests in black-gowns, were walking their rounds, 
And binding with briars, my joys and desires. 

************************************************************************* 

William Blake 

The  poem  is  in  a  simple  song-like  form.  It  tells  a  simple  story  that  turns  out  to  be  highly 

symbolic.  It  is  built  on  a  series  of  contrasts:  the  garden/a  graveyard;  open/closed; 

flowers/briars;  green/black,  and  implicitly  childhood,  innocence  and  freedom/age,  morality 

and rules. The move from the one to the other is seen very negatively and the poem seems to 

be  hostile  to  organised  religion  as  represented  by  the  Chapel  and  the  priests,  who  are 

associated with death. The sense of being shut out is emphasised in lines five and six by the 

series  of  strong  final  t  sounds.  The  poet  almost  seems  to  be  experiencing  a  nightmare:  the 

Garden of Love appears to change into a graveyard before the poet’s very eyes. The Garden 

of  Love  might  suggest  the  story  of  Adam  and  Eve’s  loss  of  Paradise  and  the  fall  of  man, 

though  here  told  with  a  very  different  emphasis.  “Thou  shalt  not”  obviously  recalls  the  Ten 

Commandments. The diction is very simple and nearly monosyllabic. The lines of the second 

stanza get longer than those in the first, and the final two lines of the poem are longer again. 

This disruption of the poem’s structure mirrors the feelings of the poet, and is also reflected 

in  the  change  in  the  rhyme  scheme:  a/b/c/b  in  the  first  two  stanzas,  but  a/b/c/d  in  the  third 

with an internal half-rhyme (gowns/rounds – this may have been a full rhyme to Blake) and a 

full  internal  rhyme  in  the  final  line  (briars/desires).  The  further  importance  of  these  lines  is 

stressed by the use of alliteration (w and b). 

107 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Example 5 (advanced) 

********************************************************************** 

To a Poor Old Woman*
 

munching a plum on 
the street a paper bag 
of them in her hand 

They taste good to her 
They taste good 
to her. They taste 
good to her. 

You can see it by 
the way she gives herself 
to the one half 
sucked out in her hand 

Comforted 
a  solace of ripe plums 
seeming  to  fill  the  air 
They taste good to her 

William Carlos Williams 

********************************************************************** 

The  content  is  quite  straightforward:  a  woman  is  enjoying  eating  a  plum.  The  emphasis  lies 

on  her  pleasure,  as  shown  by  the  fourfold  repetition  of  “they  taste  good  to  her”.  Maybe  the 

title hints at a contrast: the poor old woman is unlike the well-to-do rather younger male poet, 

but she is  getting intense sensual pleasure from  a piece of fruit.  Is this a warning to people, 

particularly  the  educated,  in  our  complex  world  with  our  minds  on  a  million  matters,  not  to 

forget the simple (animal) joys of life? Seen this way, the title may be ironic. This old woman 

is far from poor in the sense that counts. The poem stresses her concentration on the plum she 

is  eating.  She  gives  herself  to  it;  more  commonly  one  gives  oneself  to  a  lover.  The  plum 

seems to take over and the reference to “fills the air” hints at the fragrance of plums. The way 

“solace”  is  used  it  almost  becomes  a  collective  noun  for  plums  –  a  solace  of  plums  like  a 

bunch of bananas. And note that there is no danger of pleasure coming to an end too soon – 

the old woman has an entire bag of plums in her hand waiting to be consumed. 

*  By  William  Carlos  Williams,  from  COLLECTED  POEMS:  1909-1939,  VOLUME  I,  copyright  ©   1938  by 

New Directions Publishing Corp. Reprinted by permission of New Directions Publishing Corp. 

108 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 

The  title  seems  to  run  into  the  first  verse,  but  formally  they  are  separate  and  there  would 

certainly be a pause in any recitation of the poem, so we start in medias res; the old lady is in 

the middle of her feast. The poem has to be read aloud. The vowels forced the reader to purse 

the  lips  as  consonants  “m”,  “p”  and  “b”  are  labials  –  in  other  words,  reading  the  first  few 

lines forces the lips to imitate the act of eating a plum! “They taste good to her” needs to be 

spoken differently each time, possibly more ecstatically (maybe that is why the poet lays out 

the  sentence  in  different  ways  on  its  different  appearances).  Then  the  lips  are  back  to  work 

with  “sucked”,  “comforted”,  “solace”  (almost  saliva-producing),  “plums”  and  “seeming”. 

This is a truly delicious poem. 

[Note:  use  of  phonetic  terms  such  as  labial,  dental  and  sibilant  is  useful  but  by  no  means 

necessary  –  observing  the  phenomenon  is  what  counts,  not  the  technical  term.  Teachers 

should use their own discretion and knowledge of their students when deciding whether these 

terms would interest and assist their students or merely dampen their interest.] 

109 

 
 

 

Appendix 3 

Examples of Analysis of Prose Texts 

Example 1 

Extract from “The Tell-Tale Heart” by Edgar Allan Poe 

A  servant  has  murdered  his  employer.  Neighbours  have  reported  suspicious  noises  and  the 

police  are  investigating.  The  police  have  found  nothing  suspicious  and  sit  chatting  with  the 

servant. 

************************************************************************* 

No  doubt  I  now  grew  very  pale;  –  but  I  talked  more  fluently,  and  with  a 
heightened voice. Yet the sound increased – and what could I do? It was a 
low,  dull,  quick  sound  –  much  such  a  sound  as  a  watch  makes  when 
enveloped in cotton. I gasped for breath – and yet the officers heard it not. 
I talked more quickly – more vehemently; but the noise steadily increased. 
I   arose   and   argued   about   trifles,   in   a   high   key   and   with   violent 
gesticulations; but  the  noise  steadily  increased.  Why  would  they  not  be 
gone? I paced the floor to and fro with heavy strides, as if excited to fury 
by the observations of the men – but the noise steadily increased. Oh God! 
what could I  do?  I  foamed –  I  raved –  I  swore!  I  swung  the chair upon 
which  I  had  been  sitting,  and  grated  it  upon  the  boards,  but  the  noise 
arose over all and continually increased. It grew louder – louder – louder! 
And  still  the  men  chatted  pleasantly,  and  smiled.  Was  it  possible  they 
heard not? Almighty God! – no, no! They heard! – they suspected – they 
knew! – they were making a mockery of my horror! – this I thought, and 
this I think. But anything was better than this agony! Anything was more 
tolerable  than  this  derision!  I  could  bear  those  hypocritical  smiles  no 
longer! I felt that I must scream or die! and now – again! – hark! louder! 
louder! louder! 

“Villains!” I shrieked, “dissemble  no  more!  I  admit the deed! –  tear up 
the planks! here, here! – it is the beating of his hideous heart!” 

************************************************************************* 

Sample analysis 

This climactic passage is narrated in the first person by the servant, who, it seems, has indeed 

killed  his  employer.  It  is  interesting  for  the  reader  to  reconstruct  what  the  police  observe. 

They are satisfied with whatever the servant has told them and are talking  pleasantly to him 

while he becomes more  and more agitated, making more and more noise to cover the sound 

of the dead man’s heart, which to him is frighteningly audible. He insists the police must also 

110 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

have been able to hear it, but that only adds to the irony of the piece. Obviously, dead men’s 

hearts  do  not  beat  and  no  man’s  heartbeat  makes  a  deafening  sound.  Although  the  narrator 

does not realise it, he has gone out of his mind and quite unnecessarily gives away his crime. 

We can only assume that his guilt and panic (made very clear by the ever increasing number 

of exclamation marks) lead him to imagine he can hear the heart. The police officers’ growing 

puzzlement,  concern,  suspicion  and  then  final  realisation  of  the  truth  are  not  presented 

directly,  but  are  easy  to  reconstruct.  Having  to  view  the  situation  through  the  eyes  of  a 

madman is what gives this passage power and interest. 

The  principal  techniques  used  are  repetition  (“the  noise  steadily  increased”;  “louder, 

louder…”), rhetorical questions (“and what could  I do?”, etc.), a rapid sequence of verbs (“I 

talked/I  paced/I  foamed  –  I  raved  –  I  swore!/I  swung”,  etc.)  and  a  choice  of  monosyllables 

(“low,  dull,  quick  sound”).  The  repetition  adds  to  the  sense  of  hysteria,  and  along  with  the 

monosyllables echoes the heart beat that is central to the story. The rhetorical questions help 

create the effect of hearing the thoughts of the narrator, and the verbs mirror his restlessness 

and increasing agitation. The contrast between the policemen’s calm and the speaker’s panic 

and mental breakdown is also important to the overall effect. 

The way in which the speaker’s guilty conscience leads directly to the discovery of his crime 

makes the message of the story quite clear: crime does not pay and sin will be punished. 

Further notes 

The following points could be referred to in the guided questions: 

•     What is the state of mind of the speaker? 

•     Do you think the policemen see and hear the same as the servant? 

•  What is the effect of the repetition used in the extract? 

The words that might be glossed are: 

•  vehemently 

• 

trifles 

•  gesticulations 

• 

strides 

 

• 

• 

• 

fury 

foamed 

raved 

•  grated 

•  derision 

•  hark 

•  dissemble 

•  planks 

111 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 2 

Extract from Mrs Dalloway by Virginia Woolf*
 

************************************************************************* 

Mrs. DALLOWAY said she would buy the flowers herself. 

For  Lucy  had  her  work  cut  out  for  her.  The  doors  would  be  taken  off  their 
hinges; Rumpelmayer’s men were coming. And then, thought Clarissa Dalloway, 
what a morning – fresh as if issued to children on a beach. 

What  a  lark!  What  a  plunge!  For  so  it  had  always  seemed  to  her,  when, 
with  a  little  squeak  of  the  hinges,  which  she  could  hear  now,  she  had 
burst open the French windows and plunged at Bourton into the open air. 
How fresh, how calm,  stiller than this  of course, the air was in the  early 
morning; like the flap of a wave; the kiss of a wave; chill and sharp and 
yet  (for  a  girl  of  eighteen  as  she  then  was)  solemn,  feeling  as  she  did, 
standing  there  at  the  open  window,  that  something  awful  was  about  to 
happen;  looking  at  the  flowers,  at  the  trees  with  the  smoke  winding  off 
them  and  the  rooks  rising,  falling;  standing  and  looking  until  Peter 
Walsh  said,  “Musing  among  the  vegetables?”  –  was  that  it?  –  “I  prefer 
men to cauliflowers” – was that it? He must have said it at breakfast one 
morning  when  she  had  gone  out  on  to  the  terrace  –  Peter  Walsh.  He 
would  be  back  from  India  one  of  these  days,  June  or  July,  she  forgot 
which,  for  his  letters  were  awfully  dull;  it  was  his  sayings  one 
remembered;  his  eyes,  his  pocket-knife,  his  smile,  his  grumpiness  and, 
when  millions  of  things  had  utterly  vanished  –  how  strange  it  was!  –  a 
few sayings like this about cabbages. 

************************************************************************* 

Sample analysis 

This  passage  cleverly  mimics  the  way  the  mind  works  as  it  moves  from  link  to  link.  The 

thought  of  workmen  taking  doors  off  hinges  brings  the  sound  of  hinges  to  Mrs  Dalloway’s 

mind, and thus she recalls a particular morning in the past. We move from reported speech to 

reported thought to deeper memory  (starting in the second paragraph). Mrs Dalloway’s own 

simile associating the morning with a beach sets up another series of links – from “beach” to 

two  “plunges”  and  two  “waves”.  “Fresh”  leads  to  another  “fresh”  and  to  “chill”.  The 

memories  take  Mrs  Dalloway  to  the  subject  of  Peter  Walsh,  whom  she  had  obviously  once 

found rather attractive (“his eyes…his smile”). Is it possible that “kiss” is also a link leading 

to his name? Mrs Dalloway struggles to remember something amusing he once said, but can’t 

quite  locate  it  and  ends  up  associating  Peter  with  vegetables,  perhaps  reflecting  on  the 

dullness of his letters and obvious loss of glamour in her eyes, compared to when she was a 

*  Reprinted  by  permission  of  The  Society  of  Authors  as  the  Literary  Representative  of  the  Estate  of  Virginia 

Woolf. 

112 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

solemn girl setting out on the start of her life (symbolised by the open windows). 

Mrs  Dalloway  seems  to  come  from  an  affluent  background.  Lucy  usually  buys  the  flowers, 

but  needs  to  deal  with  workmen  this  morning;  she  seems  to  be  the  maid.  The  house  in  Mrs 

Dalloway’s  memory  seems  large  with  its  terrace  and  lovely  view.  We  catch  a  little  of  her 

character in her thoughtfulness for Lucy, her excitement and pleasure at going out on a fresh 

morning and the lightness of her stream of consciousness with a hint of vagueness thrown in. 

The diction is everyday, but has a certain charm and naturalness. 

Further notes 

Note that it is acceptable to make tentative suggestions in the form of a question or by using 

words like “possibly”. Few, if any, glosses would be necessary. 

113 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 3 

Extract from The Lagoon by Joseph Conrad 

************************************************************************* 

(It  has  not  been  possible  to  reproduce  the  text  here,  although  every  effort 
has been made to seek copyright permission. Teachers might like to access 
the text at the website: www.readprint.com 
“The   narrow   creek   was   like   a   ditch:   …with   a   suggestion  of   sad 
tenderness and care in the droop of their leafy and soaring heads.”) 

************************************************************************* 

Sample analysis 

This descriptive passage seeks to create in the reader an experience of the tropical rainforest. 

It  does  this  partly  by  means  of  adjectives.  These  are  as  luxuriant  as  the  vegetation  being 

described.  From  one  short  paragraph  we  can  select:  tortuous,  immense,  invisible,  festooned, 

glistening, writhing, sombre, tangled, fantastic, mysterious, invincible and impenetrable. The 

diction is polysyllabic, literary and Latinate. Another technique involves syntax. The sentence 

“Darkness oozed…forests” is itself a tangle of  clauses and phrases. The creek seems almost 

mirrored in the organisation of the first sentence with a small section between two banks. The 

third method is to make us move slowly away from the forest and carry us on to a contrasting 

open lagoon with a small human habitation there. 

The tone is menacing. One suspects that something unpleasant is going to happen. The words 

“tortuous”, “twisted”, and “writhing” all suggest pain. There is frequent reference to darkness 

and  gloom.  (“Darkness  oozed”  is  particularly  strong.)  There  are  many  negative  formations 

(“immense”, “impenetrable”, etc.). The third sentence, curling round like its content, reminds 

us  of  snakes;  later  on  comes  the  word  “poisonous”.  The  lagoon  is  stagnant,  suggesting  a 

threat  to  health.  Although  the  grass,  pink  cloud,  lotus  and  little  house  lighten  the  picture 

slightly, the palms hanging over it do so “with a suggestion of sad tenderness.” Movement is 

kept  to  a  minimum  also:  oozing  is  slow,  the  leaves  are  unstirring,  the  men  only  pole  along, 

the water is stagnant, the cloud drifts, and the palms droop. Life here seems almost arrested. 

The scene seems set for sadness or even horror. 

114 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 4 

Extract from Women In Love by D.H. Lawrence 

************************************************************************* 

(It  has  not  been  possible  to  reproduce  the  text  here,  although  every  effort 
has been made to seek copyright permission. Teachers might like to access 
the text at the website: www.nt.armstrong.edu/Lawrence.htm 
“ “The fool!” cried Ursula loudly. “Why doesn’t he ride away till it’s gone 
by?”  …  It  made  Gudrun  faint  with  poignant  dizziness,  which  seemed  to 
penetrate to her heart.”) 

************************************************************************* 

Sample analysis 

This  passage  seems  to  be  important  for  character  and  may  represent  a  moment  of  great 

emotional importance. Ursula and Gudrun watch a man riding a horse which has been thrown 

into  a  panic  by  a  passing  train.  The  man  resists  the  horse’s  fear  and,  despite  the  danger  of 

being  thrown  off  and  badly  injured,  forces  it  to  stay  and  obey  him.  Ursula’s  reaction  of 

impatience  seems  a  normal  one.  Gudrun’s  reaction  is  far  more  complex.  She  is  excited 

(dilated eyes, “spellbound”, “faint with dizziness”) and possibly falls in love with and under 

the power of the horse rider (“spellbound” and “penetrate to her heart” suggest this). The man 

is shown to be “obstinate”; he has a powerful will, shows “fixed amusement” when in danger 

and exerts strong compulsion on the horse. He seems a very stereotyped macho man. In fact, 

one can’t help noticing that it is  stressed throughout the passage that the horse is female (as 

well as telling us it’s a mare, the narrator uses she/her in the many references to the animal). 

One  wonders  if  the  whole  incident  is  not  intended  to  be  symbolic  of  a  man  mastering  a 

woman,  making  this  an  extract  that  could  infuriate  a  feminist.  (Note  also  the  detail  of  the 

nervous women clinging together rather helplessly.) 

The  sentences  attempt  to  model  their  content.  The  second  sentence  seems  to  wheel  around 

like  the  horse,  and  mimic  the  noise  of  the  locomotive  (the  effects  being  strengthened  by 

alliteration – wheeling, wind, will; spun and swerved; heavily, horrifying – and various sound 

echoes – nor/clamour/terror and one/other/one/other/over). 

The  sentence  about  the  locomotive  also  mimics  the  action  of  the  brakes  and  uses  sound  to 

give 

the  effect  of 

the 

frightening  metallic  sounds 

the  mare 

fears  so  much 

(BraKes/BaCK/truCKs/reBounding/Buffers/triKing/cymBals/lashIng/rIghtful/strIdent/ 

ConCussions/:  b/k/i).  Inversion  is  used  (“back  came  the  trucks”  and  “Back  she  went”)  to 

match the action being described. Many similar comments could be made about the sentence 

“But…whirlwind”. Perhaps the whirlwind reflects also Gudrun’s emotions. 

115 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

It seems possible that the passage may describe the opening of a stormy relationship. 

A final point is the strange way in which the locomotive seems to have the will of its own and 

puts on its own brakes. Possibly this suggests that we live in a world where “will” is a force 

almost beyond understanding that determines destiny. The locomotive is in a sense a symbol 

of the horse rider. 

117 

 
 

 

Example 5 

Extract from Mr Sampath: The Printer of Malgudi by R.K. Narayan 

************************************************************************* 

(Permission to reproduce the extract has been obtained for the print version 
of this Guide only. Teachers might like to use the following details to locate 
the text: 
Narayan,  R.K.  (1993).  Mr  Sampath  –  The  Printer  of  Malgudi.  London: 
Minerva  Paperback.  Chapter  1,  pp.  5-6,  “Unless  you  had  an  expert 
knowledge of the locality you would not reach the offices of The Banner … 
he  had  not  made  such  a  fool  of  himself  as  his  well-wishers  had  feared, 
although the enterprise meant almost nothing to him financially.”) 

************************************************************************* 

Sample analysis 

This  appears  to  be  an  opening  passage  that  plays  the  same  role  as  an  establishing  shot  in  a 

film.  We  travel  down  some  streets  to  a  building,  go  up  some  stairs  and  stop  in  a  newspaper 

office. The stage is set for the story to begin. 

Of  course,  a  lot  more  is  going  on  than  this.  The  omniscient  narrator  establishes  a  gentle, 

amused,  slightly  cynical  and  ironic,  but  kindly  tone.  This  is  achieved  in  a  number  of  ways. 

First, there is the idea of the rather troublesome road with a mind and personality of its own 

(as we learn later, very much like the people of this town, especially the editor of the Banner). 

Second, there is the ironic contrast between the grand abstractions of truth and vision, and the 

obviously  ramshackle  and  symbolically  blinded  offices  of  the  Banner  –  even  the  stairs  are 

actually more like a ladder. The contrast, however, is not pointed out bitterly, and in fact, the 

fourth  paragraph  states  that  the  newspaper  does  indeed  play  a  responsible  social  role  (the 

details given also help us to start building up a picture of the town of Malgudi). Third, there 

are  many  light  touches  –  the  idea  of  someone  posting  themselves  on  the  table,  the  editor’s 

riposte to his neighbours that no one could possibly want to observe them, and the eccentric 

name  of  the  “Open  Window”  feature.  Even  the  diction  is  lighthearted.  The  world’s  evil  is 

presented as pig-headedness (though it is the tenants of the pig-headed landlords who have to 

live in the pig-sties!) rather than any more terrible sin. The quotations from the Banner begin 

to introduce us to its style – grand, again in contrast to its humble format (ironically printed 

on foolscap paper/F4) and the mind of its editor,  whose characterisation is getting underway 

as the extract ends: an idealist, a man who likes to be independent, who is sensitive to being 

laughed  at,  stubborn  and  with  the  self-image  of  a  man  of  principle,  rather  than  of  business. 

The passage sets the scene well for a story to commence. 

118 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Preparing for the Public Examination 

Appendix 4 

Paper 1 

SECTION A   PROSE/DRAMA ANALYSIS 

Example 1 

Read the extract below and answer the questions which follow it. 
************************************************************************** 

The Old Man and the Sea - E. Hemingway 

(Permission  to  use  the  extract  has  been  obtained  for  the  print  version  of 
this  Guide  only.  Teachers  might  like  to  use  the  following  to  locate  the 
text: 
Hemingway,  Ernest.  (1966).  The  Old  Man  and  the  Sea.  Middlesex: 
Penguin. pp. 91-92, “The old man’s head was clear and good now and he 
was  full  of  resolution  but  he  had  little  hope  …  he  thought,  and  now  my 
fish bleeds again and there will be others.” 

************************************************************************** 

(i)  Show how Hemingway’s philosophy of life as set forth in The Old Man and the Sea is 

reflected in this extract. 

(ii)  Discuss the use of language in the extract in detail and show some of the special effects 

Hemingway creates. 

A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

(i) 

–   The old man  is the hero of the book and offered as  a model; he  is an Everyman, 

nameless but an individual. 

−  The old man was determined to catch the marlin and in this extract is determined 

to defend it; he is stubborn and full of fight. 

−  He  recognises  there  are  many  sharks  and  he  is  fighting  a  losing  battle,  but  this 

does not deter him. 

−   He  hates  the  shark  as  his  enemy,  but  we  see  the  shark  also  has  “resolution”;  it 

won’t die easily – it makes a commotion before it sinks into the depths. 

−  Life is a struggle we rarely win, but a man should never stop fighting. 

(ii) 

–   Simple diction/simple man 

119 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

−  Long  first  two  sentences  of  second  paragraph  lack  punctuation,  representing  the 

speed and flow of the action. 

−  The shark is “he”, a worthy opponent. 

−   We see the shark as though through the sights of the harpoon. 

−   The three participles bring the jaws into focus. 

−  Short, sharp “He hit it”, repeated. 

−  “The shark swung over…” mirrors the action. 

−   “The rope came taut, shivered and then snapped” mirrors the action. 

Sample analysis 

(i)  This  extract  comes  at  a  critical  moment  in  Hemingway’s  fable  of  human  dreams 
and  achievement.  After  waiting  almost  a  lifetime,  the  old  fisherman  catches  the  most 
wonderful  marlin.  He  lashes  it  to  his  simple  boat  and  begins  the  voyage  home,  but  the 
tropical  waters of  the Gulf  of  Mexico are full of  sharks, which  will be attracted by  the 
scent of blood and may destroy the marlin’s carcass. The old man has had to spend hours 
out at sea to catch the marlin and he has been weakened by the ordeal, but his spirit and 
sheer stubbornness remain strong. The extract opens with the old man’s sad, realistic but 
unbowed  assessment  of  the  situation.  The  omniscient  narrator,  using  a  fairly  simple 
diction  suitable  to  the lifestyle  of  the  old fisherman,  keeps  us  closely  in  touch  with  the 
old man’s thoughts. The old man both is and is not an individual – the narrator does not 
use  his  name,  but  we  are,  for  example,  reminded  of  his  ethnicity  by  the  Spanish 
expression. The old man is representative of a type of human, one who  will not accept 
defeat easily. 

Life in The Old Man and the Sea is obstinate. It took a long time to defeat, tire and 
reel in the marlin – both the old man and the great fish have “resolution” – now it is the 
shark’s turn to refuse to give in. It makes a commotion as it dies, and then sinks into the 
deep.  The  old  man  has won,  but  he  knows  his  victory  will  be  very  short-lived.  Such  is 
existence. 

(ii)  The long first two sentences of the second paragraph with their lack of punctuation 
show  the  speed  and  flow  of  the  action.  The  shark  is  dignified  with  a  “he”  –  he  is  a 
worthy opponent. Almost as if it is a film, for a moment we look through the imaginary 
sights of the harpoon. Then, the jaws come into focus with the three participles. This is 
followed  by  a  short,  sharp  sentence  just  like  the  blow  itself.  “He  hit  it…  He  hit  it…” 
creates the feeling of the harpoon being driven home. There is no false glamour here: the 
narrator  openly  refers  to  the  old  man’s  “malignancy”.  The  old  man  hates  the  shark 
utterly. 

Other sentences that mirror the action could be “The shark swung over…”, and the 

last part of “The water was white…”. 

120 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Example 2 

Read the extract below and answer the question which follows it. 
************************************************************************** 

The Two Towers - J.R.R. Tolkien*
 

Before the next day dawned their journey to Mordor was over. The marshes 
and the desert were behind them. Before them, darkling against a pallid sky, 
the great mountains reared their threatening heads. 

Upon  the  west  of  Mordor  marched  the  gloomy  range  of  Ephel  Duáth,  the 
Mountains  of  Shadow,  and  upon  the  north  the  broken  peaks  and  barren 
ridges  of  Ered  Lithui,  grey  as  ash.  But  as  these  ranges  approached  one 
another, being indeed but parts of one great wall about the mournful plains 
of Lithlad and of Gorgoroth, and the bitter inland sea of Nứren amidmost, 
they swung out long arms northward; and between these arms there was a 
deep defile. This was Cirith Gorgor, the Haunted Pass, the entrance to the 
land of the Enemy. High cliffs lowered upon either side, and thrust forward 
from  its  mouth  were  two  sheer  hills,  black-boned  and  bare.  Upon  them 
stood  the  Teeth  of  Mordor,  two  towers  strong  and  tall.  In  days  long  past 
they  were  built  by  the  Men  of  Gondor  in  their  pride  and  power,  after  the 
overthrow of Sauron and his flight, lest he should seek to return to his old 
realm. But the strength of Gondor failed, and men slept, and for long years 
the  towers  stood  empty.  Then    Sauron    returned.  Now  the  watch-towers, 
which  had  fallen  into  decay,  were  repaired,  and  filled  with  arms,  and 
garrisoned  with  ceaseless  vigilance.  Stony-faced  they  were,  with  dark 
window-holes  staring  north  and  east  and  west,  and  each  window  was  full 
of sleepless eyes. 

Across the mouth  of  the  pass,  from cliff to  cliff, the Dark  Lord  had  built  a 
rampart  of  stone.  In  it  there  was  a  single  gate  of  iron,  and  upon  its 
battlement sentinels paced unceasingly. Beneath the hills on either side the 
rock  was  bored  into  a  hundred  caves  and  maggot-holes;  there  a  host  of 
orcs  lurked,  ready  at  a  signal  to  issue  forth  like  black  ants  going  to  war. 
None  could  pass  the  Teeth  of  Mordor  and  not  feel  their  bite;  unless  they 
were summoned by Sauron, or knew the secret passwords that would open 
the Morannon, the black gate of his land. 

************************************************************************** 

Discuss how the language is used to create the style. 

* Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.© 1996. 

121 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

Style:  the  work  as a  whole  is  epic,  drawing  on Norse,  Celtic  and  Germanic  myth.  This  is a 

dramatic moment in the story where style becomes especially grand. 

− 

− 

− 

− 

− 

Archaic vocabulary: “darkling”, “amidmost” and “lest” is used. 

The style is very rich in adjectives, some doubled and even reinforced with alliteration, 
e.g. “black-boned and bare”. 

There is a liking for doublets, e.g. “broken peaks and barren ridges”, “strong and tall”, 
“pride and power”. 

There is a frequent, though restrained, use of inversion: “thrust forward from its mouth 
were   two   sheer   hills,   black-boned   and   bare”,   “two   towers   strong   and   tall”, 

“Stony-faced they were …”. 

One  or  two  similes  add  to  the  effect,  e.g.  “grey  as  ash”  and  “like  black  ants  going  to 
war”. 

− 

There is also the use of an extra “and” in lists (see the sentences “But the strength…” 

and “Now the watch-towers…”). This creates a slightly Biblical feel to the passage and 
adds to the solemnity. 

− 

Tolkien  also  uses  names  for  this  purpose,  e.g.  the  mysterious  Gaelic-sounding  Ephel 

Duáth  and  Ered  Lithui,  and  the  menacing-sounding  Mordor  (obviously  echoing 

“murder”, also Latin “mors” = “death”) Gorgoroth (echoing gorgon) and Sauron Greek 

for “lizard”). Other names are even more direct, e.g. the Teeth of Mordor. 

− 

The  talk  of  teeth  leads  on  to  a  comment  on  their  “bite”.  The  whole  landscape  comes 

dangerously  alive  in  this  passage.  Geographical  features  are  the  grammatical  subjects 

of  the  majority  of  the  sentences  in  the  first  twelve  paragraphs  and  the  verbs, 

metaphorical as they are, begin to turn them into dangerous creatures: 

“the great mountains reared their threatening heads”; 

“they swung out long arms northward”; and 

“High cliffs lowered …”. 

We read later also of a mouth. 

− 

There is a stress on the absence of colour, e.g. “darkling”, “pallid”, “Shadow”, “grey”, 
“black-boned”. 

− 

The imagery is of death, e.g. “black-boned”, “decay”, “stony-faced”, “maggot-holes”. 

Sample analysis 

Menaced  by  the  growing  power  of  Sauron  with  his  forces  of  evil  in  Mordor, 
the Fellowship of the Ring, made up of representatives of some of the different races of 
Middle  Earth,  forms  to  resist  him.  Their  prime  task  is  to  prevent  the  One  Ring  in  the 
possession of Frodo the hobbit, from falling into Sauron’s hands, while at the same time 
carrying it deep into his kingdom to destroy it in the Mountain of Fire. The companions 

122 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

become  divided  and  Frodo  and  Sam  have  to  travel  on  alone  with  the  help  of  the 
unreliable Gollum. At this point in the story they reach a milestone in their journey, the 
Black Gate, well-guarded entrance to Mordor. 

Tolkien’s  work  is  an  epic,  drawing  on  the  traditions  of  Norse,  Celtic  and 
Germanic  myth,  as  well  as  British  fantasy  literature.  For  his  descriptive  passages,  he 
writes  in  a  rather  grand  style,  as  here.  Some  of  the  vocabulary  is  slightly  archaic: 
“darkling”,  “amidmost”  and  “lest”.  The  style  is  very  rich  in  adjectives,  some  doubled 
and even reinforced with  alliteration, e.g.  “black-boned and  bare”. There is  a liking  for 
doublets,  e.g.  “broken  peaks  and  barren  ridges”,  “strong  and  tall”,  “pride  and  power”. 
There is a frequent, though restrained, use of inversion: “thrust forward from its mouth 
were two sheer hills, black-boned and bare”, “two towers strong and tall”, “Stony-faced 
they  were …”.  One  or  two  similes  add  to  the  effect,  e.g.  “grey  as  ash”  and  “like  black 
ants going to war”. There is also the use of an extra “and” in lists (see the sentences “But 
the strength…”  and “Now the watch-towers…”). This creates a slightly  Biblical feel to 
the passage and adds to the solemnity. Tolkien also uses names for this purpose, e.g. the 
mysterious  Gaelic-sounding  Ephel  Duáth  and  Ered  Lithui,  and  the  menacing-sounding 
Mordor  (mors  =  death  in  Latin)  Gorgoroth  (echoing  gorgon)  and  Sauron  (Greek  for 
“lizard”). Other names are even more direct, e.g. the Teeth of Mordor. 

The talk of teeth leads on to a comment on their “bite”. The whole landscape 
comes  dangerously  alive  in  this  passage.  Geographical  features  are  the  grammatical 
subjects  of  the  majority  of  the  sentences  in  the  first  twelve  paragraphs  and  the  verbs, 
metaphorical as they are, begin to turn them into dangerous creatures: 

“the great mountains reared their threatening heads”; 
“they swung out long arms northward”; and 
“High cliffs lowered …”. 
We read later also of a mouth. 

There is a stress on the absence of colour, e.g. “darkling”, “pallid”, “Shadow”, 
“grey”  and  “black-boned”.  The  imagery  is  of  death,  e.g.  “black-boned”,  “decay”, 
“stony-faced”,  “maggot-holes”.  Tolkein,  indeed,  musters  all  his  art  to  create  this  grim 
picture to emphasise the difficulty of the hobbits’ task and increase the suspense. 

123 

 

 

 

 

Example 3 

Read the extract below and answer the questions which follow it. 
************************************************************************** 

The Diary of a Nobody - George and Weedon Grossmith*

 

November  16  –  Woke  about  twenty  times  during  the  night,  with  terrible 
thirst. Finished off all the water in the bottle, as well as half that in the jug. 
Kept  dreaming  also,  that  last  night’s  party  was  a  failure,  and  that  a  lot  of 
low  people came without invitation, and  kept  chaffing and  throwing things 
at Mr. Perkkup, till at last I was obliged to hide him in the box-room (which 
we had just discovered), with a  bath-towel over him. It seems absurd now, 
but it was painfully real in the dream. I had the same dream about a dozen 
times. 

Carrie  annoyed  me  by  saying:  “You  know  champagne  never  agrees  with 
you.”  I  told  her  I  had  only  a  couple  of  glasses  of  it,  having  kept  myself 
entirely to port. I added that good champagne hurt nobody, and Lupin told 
me he had only got it from a traveller as a favour, as that particular brand 
had been entirely bought up by a West-end club. 

I  think  I  ate  too  heartily  of  the  “side  dishes”,  as  the  waiter  called  them.  I 
said  to  Carrie:  “I  wish  I  had  put  those  ‘side  dishes’  ASIDE.”  I  repeated 
this,  but  Carrie  was  busy,  packing  up  the  teaspoons  we  had  borrowed  of 
Mrs.  Cummings  for  the  party.  It  was  just  half-past  eleven,  and  I  was 
starting for the office, when Lupin appeared, with a yellow complexion, and 
said: “Hulloh! Guv., what priced head have you this morning?” I told him 
he  might just as  well speak to  me  in  Dutch. He  added: “When  I  woke this 
morning,  my  head  was  as  big  as  Baldwin’s  balloon.”  On  the  spur  of  the 
moment  I  said  the  cleverest  thing  I  think  I  have  ever  said;  viz.:  “Perhaps 
that accounts for the paraSHOOTING pains.” We all three roared. 

************************************************************************** 

(i)  What aspects of Mr Pooter’s character are evident in this extract? 

(ii)  What comic techniques does the author make use of? 

A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

(i) 
 

 

−  social anxiety (the dream) 

−  class aspirations (the party) 

− 

lack of self-knowledge (equivocations about his drunkenness) 

*  From  Ch.  10  from  The  Diary  of  a  Nobody  (1998)  edited  by  Grossmith,  G.  &  W.  By  permission  of  Oxford 

University Press. 

124 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

−  naivety (confidence in sales talk) 

−  pride (dislike of criticism from his wife) 

−  self-satisfaction (pride in his puns) 

(ii)  Comic techniques 

−  names 

−  ridiculous detail (the bath towel) 

−  serious tone, ironic effect as reader laughs at Pooter’s actions 

−  Pooter’s puns, his self-congratulation, use of capitals 

− 

− 

language snobbery (dislike of Lupin’s slang) 

the genre of the published diary, usually reserved for important people 

Sample analysis 

(i)        Mr Pooter has held a party. Mr Pooter is an aspiring member of the bourgeoisie, 
always  trying  to  behave  like  the  upper  class;  hence  the  party  with  all  its  effort  and 
expense. His dream reveals all his insecurities and fear of social failure, with ‘low people’ 
instead of refined ones coming to the party and attacking his immediate superior at work, 
Mr Perkkup. Mr Pooter, as usual, takes his own anxieties very seriously. 

Pooter  equivocates  over  his  drinking.  It  is  obvious  from  the  first  paragraph  that 
he  had  far  too  much  to  drink,  but  he  tries  to  blame  the  food  for  his  feeling  ill.  He 
contradicts himself about the champagne: 

he kept entirely to port; 
he had only a couple of glasses of champagne; 
good champagne does not cause hangovers. 

(Pooter’s naivety comes over in his faith in the sales talk of the supplier, and his 

dislike of criticism in his annoyance with his wife, Carrie.) 

(ii)       The  names  in  this  book  are  chosen  for  their  comic  effect:  Pooter  reflects 
“footling” and “poodle”; Mr Perkkup sounds like an instruction to sit up straight; Lupin 
is related to flowers and walls, and is rather too “poetic” for the son of the family. 

We encounter two of Pooter’s terrible puns, which he admires so wholeheartedly 
and in such a self-congratulatory way he even uses capitals in his diary to ensure nobody 
could  possibly  miss  them.  It  is  hard  though  to  credit  Pooter’s  explanation  of  Carrie’s 
missing  the  first  pun  –  it  seems  clear  she  chose  to  ignore  it.  Lupin’s  slang,  as  usual, 
annoys his father, but he carefully records his appreciation of the second pun. 

As  we  find  throughout  the  book,  a  lot  of  the  humour  comes  from  the  diarist’s 
meticulous detail. For example, the mention of the bath-towels adds the touch of humour 
so   typical   of   this   gentle   satire   of   lower   middle-class   pretentiousness.   Generally, 
published diaries have more traditionally dealt with the doings of great statesmen rather 
than   the   daily   lives   of   clerks.   The   bourgeois   interest   in   material   possessions   is 
well-caught in this way. 

125 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Example 4 

Read the extract below and answer the questions which follow it. 
************************************************************************** 

Androcles and the Lion - G.B. Shaw*
 

The  Emperor  (majestically):  What  ho,  there!  All  who  are  within  hearing,  return 
without  fear.  Caesar  has  tamed  the  lion.  (All  the  fugitives  steal  cautiously in.  The 
menagerie keeper comes from the passage with other keepers armed with iron bars 
and tridents). Take those things away. I have subdued the beast. (He places his foot 
on it). 

Ferrovius  (timidly  approaching  the  Emperor  and  looking  down  with  awe  on  the 
lion): It is strange that I, who fear no man, should fear a lion. 

The Captain: Every man fears something, Ferrovius. 

The Emperor: How about the Pretorian Guard now? 

Ferrovius:  In  my  youth  I  worshipped Mars,  the  God  of  War.  I  turned  from  him  to 
serve  the  Christian  god;  but  today  the  Christian  god  forsook  me;  and  Mars 
overcame  me  and  took  back  his  own.  The  Christian  god  is  not  yet.  He  will  come 
when  Mars  and  I  are  dust;  but  meanwhile I  must  serve  the  gods  that  are,  not  the 
God that will be. Until then I accept service in the Guard, Caesar. 

The  Emperor:  Very  wisely  said.  All  really  sensible  men  agree  that  the  prudent 
course  is  to  be  neither  bigoted  in  our  attachment  to  the  old  nor  rash  and 
unpractical  in  keeping  an  open  mind  for  the  new,  but  to  make  the  best  of  both 
dispensations. 

The Captain: What do you say, Lavinia? Will you too be prudent? 

Lavinia (on the stair): No: I’ll strive for the coming of the God who is not yet. 

The Captain: May I come and argue with you occasionally? 

Lavinia: Yes, handsome Captain: you may. (He kisses her hands). 

The  Emperor:  And now,  my  friends, though I  do not, as  you see, fear this lion, yet 
the strain of his presence is considerable; for none of us can feel quite sure what he 
will do next. 

The  Menagerie  Keeper:  Caesar:  give  us  this  Greek  sorcerer  to  be  a  slave  in  the 
menagerie. He has a way with the beasts. 

Androcles (distressed): Not if they are in cages. They should not be kept in cages. 

* Reprinted by permission of The Society of Authors, on behalf of the Estate of Bernard Shaw. 

126 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

They must all be let out. 

The  Emperor:  I  give the sorcerer  to be a  slave to the first man  who lays hands  on 
him. (The menagerie keepers and the gladiators rush for Androcles. The lion starts 
up  and  faces  them.  They  surge  back).  You  see  how  magnanimous  we  Romans  are, 
Androcles. We suffer you to go in peace. 

Androcles:  I  thank  your  worship.  I  thank  you  all,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Come, 
Tommy. Whilst we stand together, no cage for you: no slavery for me. (He goes out 
with the lion, everybody crowding away to give him as wide a berth as possible). 

************************************************************************** 

(i)  With close reference to the passage, describe the concluding thoughts of the characters. 

(ii)  What does the conclusion tell us about Shaw’s view of religion? 
(iii)   How effectively does the play deliver its concluding message? 

A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

(i) 

−  The Emperor is cynical and pragmatic, flexible enough to turn any situation to his 

advantage. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(ii) 

(iii) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

−  No belief system means much to him (it is not prudent to be “bigoted”, he says), 

and his inability to handle the lion is repackaged by him as “magnanimity”. 

−  Ferrovius desserts the peaceful teachings of Christianity and accepts an offer to join 

the Imperial guards. 

 

− 

Shaw’s view is that Christians filled with war-fever are a contradiction in terms and 
should choose one side or the other. 

−  Though the story is originally about the miraculous saving of a Christian and the 

glories of martyrdom, it is emptied of religious significance in the play. 

−  None of the characters needs a religion; it is simply an expression for them of their 

deeper feelings. 

 

− 

Shaw’s failure to confront true fanaticism or to give the characters any historical 
credibility weakens the play’s impact. 

−  The play’s lightness of tone also makes it unable to deliver its message 

convincingly. 

126 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

Sample analysis 

(i)            These are the concluding lines of play and bring it to a close on a comic note 
(not only in the sense that the seemingly inevitable deaths of the Christian prisoners are 
avoided,  but  in  the  actual  humour  of  Androcles  wandering  off  with  a  ferocious  lion 
called   Tommy!).   The   emperor,   after   his   initial   panic,   boastfully   postures   as   the 
all-conquering hero. His release of Androcles and the Lion is also an  acceptance of the 
situation.  The Emperor is simply  cynical  and pragmatic, flexible enough  to  turn almost 
any  situation  to  his  own  advantage.  No  belief  system  means  much  to  him;  as  he 
comments, it is not prudent to be “bigoted”. Inability to handle the lion is repackaged by 
him as “magnanimity”.  Ferrovius (the name  recalls the metal iron, here associated with 
swords and violence) deserts the peaceful teachings of Christianity and accepts an offer 
to  join  the  Imperial  guards.  Pacifism,  he  says,  is  an  idea  whose  time  has  not  yet  come 
(“the God that will be”). 

(ii)           As Shaw notes, Christians filled with war-fever (and he saw plenty of those at 
the time of the First World War) are a contradiction in terms, and should choose one side 
or the other. Lavinia is happy to live and devote herself to the struggle for freedom (and 
possibly to the Captain, whose love for her is obvious throughout the play). Androcles is 
an  animal  activist  who  befriends  all  animals  and  cannot  bear  to  think  of  them  in  cages 
(Shaw was himself a determined vegetarian). The point is that this story, originally about 
the miraculous saving of a Christian and the glories of martyrdom is emptied of religious 
significance.  None  of  the  characters  actually  needs  a  religion  –  religion  is  simply  an 
expression for them of their deeper feelings. 

(iii)          The  rationalist  Shaw  is  satirising  hard-line  religious  positions,  but  somehow 
the failure to confront true fanaticism or to make any attempt to give the characters any 
historical credibility weakens the play’s impact.  Its lightness of tone makes it unable to 
deliver its message convincingly. 

127 

 
 

 

 

 

Example 5 

Read the extract below and answer the questions which follow it. 
************************************************************************** 

King Lear - William Shakespeare 

[Enter Albany] 

Lear:  Woe, that too late repents – O, sir, are you come? 

Is it your will? Speak, sir. Prepare my horses. 
Ingratitude! thou marble-hearted Fiend, 
More hideous when thou show’st thee in a child, 
Than the sea-monster. 

Albany:   Pray sir be patient. Lear:

 

Detested kite, thou liest. 
My train are men of choice, and rarest parts, 
That all particulars of duty know, 
And in the most exact regard, support 
The worships of their name. O most small fault, 
How ugly didst thou in Cordelia show? 
Which like an engine, wrench’d my frame of Nature 
From the fix’d place: drew from my heart all love. 
And added to the gall. O Lear, Lear, Lear! 
Beat at this gate that let thy folly in, 
And thy dear judgement out. Go, go, my people. 

Albany:  My Lord, I am guiltless, as I am ignorant 

Of what hath moved you. 

[Exeunt Kent and Attendants] 

Lear: 

It may be so, my Lord. 
Hear Nature, hear dear Goddess, hear: 
Suspend thy purpose, if thou didst intend 
To make this creature fruitful: 
Into her womb convey sterility, 
Dry up in her the organs of increase, 
And from her derogate body never spring A 
babe to honour her. If she must teem, 
Create her child of spleen, that it may live 
And be a thwart disnatur’d torment to her. 
Let its stamp wrinkles in her brow of youth, 
With cadent fears fret channels in her cheeks, 
Turn all her mother’s pains and benefits 
To laughter, and content: that she may feel, 
How sharper than a serpent’s tooth it is, 
To have a thankless child. Away, away. 

************************************************************************** 

128 

[Exit] 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

Discuss why this scene could be regarded as a “turning point” in the play. 

 What does the scene reveal about Lear’s character? 

(iii)  Comment on the imagery in Lear’s language. 

A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

(i) 

−  Scene  portrays  Lear’s  reaction  when  Goneril  tries  to  lay  down  rules  for  him  and 

reduce the size of his retinue 

−  He curses Goneril (who remains silent and affected by  Lear’s rantings) for failing 

to treat him as he expects. 

−  Lear’s reaction might be disproportionate to what has happened in the play so far 

but it also anticipates the real depths of Goneril’s evil. 

−  Lear begins to realise that he has wronged Cordelia. 

(ii)  −  Shows Lear’s misery which is going to tip into madness 

−  His passionate complaint about lack of gratitude reveals his lack of understanding 

and his self-delusion (that he regarded the flattery he received as king as sincere). 

(iii)  − 

Ingratitude is personified and presented as a devil with a heart of stone. 

−  Lear’s lines contain examples of animal imagery (which runs throughout the play) 

and a number of references to body parts. 

Sample analysis 

(i)            This passage occurs when Lear storms out of Goneril’s castle because she tries 
to lay down rules for him and reduce the size of his retinue. Albany, her husband, enters 
to  find  out  what  is  happening,  and,  very  much  in  character  as  being  basically  a  decent 
man, tries to calm everyone. Lear, as usual, is too headstrong to listen. Goneril remains 
silent,  too  cold  to  be  affected  by  her  father’s  rantings,  which  she  ascribes  to  his 
“dotage”. The actress taking her part will have to decide how to show this – possibly by 
turning  her  back  on  Lear.  This  part  of  the  scene  also  gains  excitement  from  the 
movement on stage of Lear’s attendants preparing to leave. 

Lear insists that children should be grateful to their parents, and curses Goneril 
for failing to treat him as he expects. He hopes she will never have the child, or have one 
who  will  bring  her  nothing  but  pain.  Lear’s  reaction  to  Goneril’s  behaviour  is 
disproportionate  to  what  has  actually  happened  so  far,  but  it  also  anticipates  the  real 
depths of Goneril’s evil. Lear’s defence of his followers is also exaggerated. He is a man 
of extremes. The pendulum which swung so firmly against Cordelia at the beginning of 
the play is now on the move again. Lear begins to realise that he has wronged Cordelia 
(“O most small fault”). This will soon be reinforced by Regan’ s lack of sympathy when 
her father arrives on her doorstep. 

(ii)           Lear shows both his misery, which is going to tip over into madness, when he 
addresses himself (“O Lear, Lear, Lear!”) and also his self-dramatisation. Lear’s fault is 

129 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

that he puts the expression of feeling before the actual feeling. His lack of understanding 
is revealed in his passionate complaints about lack of gratitude. Was he so self-deluded 
that he ever regarded the flattery he received as king as sincere? It seems so. This is an 
issue that lies at the heart of the play. 

(iii)          Lear  calls  up  an  image  of  a  personified  Ingratitude,  a  devil  with  a  heart  of 
stone. His lines contain examples of the animal imagery that runs throughout the play, e.g. 
“sea-monster”, “kite” and “serpent”. There are also a number of references to body parts, 
e.g. the “heart”, “gall”, “wound”, “organs of increase” and “spleen”. 

130 

 

 

SECTION B  POETRY 

An example 

With reference to Boy at the Window and The Bystander answer the following questions. 

(i)  Compare the way in which the boy feels about the snowman in poem (A) with how the 

bystander in poem (B) feels about the events he witnesses. 

(ii)   Explain the references to the Bible in both of the poems and say what effect you think 

they have. 

(iii)   In line 16 of poem (A) what is the boy’s fear? 

************************************************************************** 

(A) 

Boy at the Window 

Seeing the snowman standing all alone 
In dusk and cold is more than he can bear. 
The small boy weeps to hear the wind prepare 
A night of gnashings and enormous moan. 
His tearful sight can hardly reach to where 
The pale-faced figure with bitumen eyes 
Returns him such a god-forsaken stare 
As outcast Adam gave to Paradise. 

4 

8 

The man of snow is, nonetheless, content, 
Having no wish to go inside and die. 
Still, he is moved to see the youngster cry. 
Though frozen water is his element, 
He melts enough to drop from one soft eye 
A trickle of the purest rain, a tear 
For the child at the bright pane surrounded by 
Such warmth, such light, such love, and so much fear.   16 

12 

Richard Wilbur 

(B) 

The Bystander 

I am the one who looks the other way, 
In any painting you may see me stand 
Rapt at the sky, a bird, an angel’s wing, 
While others kneel, present the myrrh, receive 
The benediction from the radiant hand. 

I hold the horses while the knights dismount 
And draw their swords to fight the battle out; 
Or else in dim perspective you may see 
My distant figure on the mountain road 
When in the plains the hosts are put to rout. 

131 

5 

10 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

I am the silly soul who looks too late, 
The dullard dreaming, second from the right. 
I hang upon the crowd, but do not mark 
(Cap over eyes) the slaughtered Innocents, 
or Icarus, his downward-plunging flight. 

Once in a Garden – back view only there – 
How well the painter placed me, stroke on stroke, 
Yet scarcely seen among the flowers and grass – 
I heard a voice say, ‘Eat,’ and would have turned – 
I often wonder who it was that spoke. 

15 

20 

Rosemary Dobson 

************************************************************************** 
A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

(i) 
 

 

 

Th e boy 

– 

feels sad that the snowman is alone and without shelter from the cold and wind 

–  projects  his  fears  of  growing  up  and  leaving  home  onto  the  snowman,  and 

 

sympathises with him 

The bystander 
– 

shows no feelings about the events he witnesses 

– 

is indifferent, and unaware of the significance of what he sees 

(ii)  Boy at the Window 

line 8 

–  The Expulsion of Adam and Eve from Paradise 

The Bystander 

line 4 

line 14 

–  The Adoration of the Magi/ Birth of Christ – the three Kings 

– 

 The Massacre of the Innocents/Herod’s slaughter of all male babies 

line 16–20   –  The Fall/The Garden of Eden – the temptation of Adam 

– 

– 

the biblical allusions make the poems more solemn, serious 

in Boy at the  Window the reference to Adam’s expulsion from Eden adds depth to 

the poem  – it  helps explain what the boy is feeling and  why. The boy is afraid of 

having  to  leave  the  warmth  and  security  of  home.  The  poem  associates  these 

feelings with how Adam must have felt when expelled from Eden. The boy’s loss 

of innocence is analogous to Adam’s Fall. 

– 

in   The   Bystander  the   allusions   intensify   by   contrast   the   indifference  of  the 

bystander 

(iii) The boy’s fear is of growing up and leaving home – of having to make his own way in a 

hostile world. It is a fear of his own mortality. 

132 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

SECTION C  UNSEEN POETRY 

Example 1 

Read the poem below and answer the questions which follow it. 
************************************************************************** 

Remember Me When I Am Gone Away 

REMEMBER me when I am gone away, 
Gone far away into the silent land; 
When you can no more hold me by the hand, 
Nor I half turn to go, yet turning stay. 
Remember me when no more day by day 
You tell me of our future that you plann’d: 
Only remember me; you understand 
It will be late to counsel then or pray. 
Yet if you should forget me for a while 
And afterwards remember, do not grieve: 
For if the darkness and corruption leave 
A vestige of the thoughts once I had, 
Better by far you should forget and smile 
Than that you should remember and be sad. 

************************************************************************** 

Christina Rossetti 

(i) 

(ii) 

Comment on the diction of the poem. 

How does the poet make use of the sonnet form? 

(iii)  Give your views on whether the poem is too sentimental or not. Justify your opinion. 

(iv)  Discuss the poetic techniques used in line 4. 

A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

(i)  Everyday diction 

–  monosyllables (making “remember” stand out) 

–  an effect of calm and ordinariness 

(ii)  –   A regular Petrarchan sonnet 

–  Octave: Please remember 

–  Sestet: Maybe you will sometimes forget 

–  Separate rhyming patterns 

–  Effect of regularity and calmness 

133 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

(iii)  The  topic  of  dying  and  being  forgotten  is  potentially  sentimental  and  the  poet’s 

resignation may not appeal to some. Line 3 is fairly emotional. Yet no religious hope is 

suggested  (Death  is  a  “silent  land”  of  “darkness  and  corruption”).  The  overall  tone  is 

calm and realistic. 

(iv)   –   The  pause  in  the  middle  of  the  line  represents  a  moment  of  hesitation  and  delayed 

departure, disappointment. 

–   The  half-lines  on  either  side  of  the  comma  are  nearly  symmetrical,  but  there  is 

slightly more weight on the side of going (seven syllables to five). 

Suggested answers 

(i)  The diction consists of very common everyday words; only three or four (e.g. “vestige”) 

would not occur high in a list of the most common words in English. “Remember” with 

its  three  syllables  stands  out  among  all  the  monosyllables.  An  ordinary  person  is 

speaking simply and trying not to dramatise a difficult situation. 

(ii)   The poem is a carefully crafted Petrarchan sonnet. The first eight lines beg the addressee 

to remember the speaker, and the final six allow that a little forgetting may be allowed: 

the  speaker  certainly  does  not  want  to  cause  pain  to  the  other  person.  The  octave  and 

sestet  as  normal  rhyme  separately.  The  calm  progression  of  the  form  and  the  regular 

pentameter lines reflect the calmness of the speaker. 

(iii)  No, not to me. The poem is certainly sad, as it is about death and the way in which we 

are  gradually  forgotten.  No  religious  hope  is  suggested.  Death  is  a  “silent  land”  of 

“darkness and corruption”. The poem, however, does not try to make us cry – it is full of 

gentle  resignation.  The  nearest  the  poem  comes  to  sentimentality  is  the  third  line,  but 

holding hands is actually natural enough for this not to be too strong or sentimental. 

(iv)  The  pause  in  the  middle  of  the  line  represents  a  moment  of  hesitation  and  delayed 

departure. The half-lines on either side of the comma are nearly symmetrical, but there is 

slightly more weight on the side of going (seven syllables to five). 

134 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 2 

Read the poem below and answer the questions which follow it. 
************************************************************************** 

The Death-bed 

WE watch’d her breathing thro’ the night, 
Her breathing soft and low, 
As in her breast the wave of life 
Kept heaving to and fro. 

So silently we seem’d to speak, 
So slowly moved about, 
As we had lent her half our powers 
To eke her living out. 

Our very hopes belied our fears, 
Our fears our hopes belied – 
We thought her dying when she slept, 
And sleeping when she died. 

For when the morn came dim and sad, 
And chill with early showers, 
Her quiet eyelids closed – she had 
Another morn than ours. 

Thomas Hood 

************************************************************************** 

(i)  Describe the techniques used in the third stanza. How successful do you think they are? 

(ii)  How suitable is the timing of the death? Give reasons for your opinion. 

(iii)   What images does the poet use? 

(iv)   Discuss the overall tone of the poem. 

A possible marking scheme 

Candidates may make the following points: 

(i)  Use of contrast and contradiction 

− 

− 

line   10   reverses   line   9,   and   line   12   reverses   line   11,   creating   an   effect   of 
disappointment 

this  may  reflect  the  confused  emotions  of  those  around  the  death-bed,  but  its 
cleverness may detract from the sincerity of the poem. 

(ii)  Dawn: a beginning, not an end; reflects the religious view that she has entered a new life 

with “another morn” – or may also be ironic. 

135 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

(iii)  –  Lines 2-4: life and breathing are related to a rather rough sea 

−  Nature is made to reflect the sadness of her death (“chill with early showers”). 

−  Her new life beyond death is a new morn. 

(iv)   –  Suitably sad; death and unpleasant new day 

−  Hopeful: quiet death followed by entry to another day elsewhere 

−  Grieving, but religious 

Suggested answers 

(i)  The stanza is built around contrasts and contradictions. In both couplets, the second line 

reverses  the  first,  and  disappointment  wins.  This  is,  indeed,  clever  and  may  reflect  the 

confused emotions of those around the death-bed, but possibly its cleverness reduces its 

sincerity, and does not increase the effectiveness of the poem. 

(ii)   The death takes place at dawn on a cold, wet day. Dawn is the start of something new. 

From the usual point of view, the time of the death might be seen as ironic, that from a 

religious  point  of  view  she  has  entered  a  new  life  “with  another  morn”.  Probably  both 

views work at the same time. 

(iii)   Between lines 2 and 4 life/breathing are related to a rather rough sea. Nature is made to 

reflect  sadness  of  her  death  in  the  fourth  verse  (“chill  with  early  showers”).  Her  life 

beyond death is a new morn. 

(iv)  The poem is suitably sad. The woman is very ill all night and dies as an unattractive day 

starts. But there is a note of hope at the end. Her final death seems quiet and she enters 

another day elsewhere. Christian hope seems to counteract the grief. 

136 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Example 3 

Read the poem below and answer the questions which follow it. 
************************************************************************** 

Done With*
 

My house is torn down – 
Plaster sifting, the pillars broken, 
Beams jagged, the wall crushed by the bulldozer. 
The whole roof has fallen 
On the hall and the kitchen 
The bedrooms, the parlor. 

They are trampling the garden – 
My mother’s lilac, my father’s grapevine, 
The freesias, the jonquils, the grasses. 
Hot asphalt goes down 
Over the torn stems, and hardens. 

What will they do in springtime 
Those bulbs and stems groping upward 
That drown in earth under the paving, 
Thick with sap, pale in the dark 
As they try the unrolling of green. 

May they double themselves 
Pushing together up to the sunlight, 
May they break through the seal stretched above them 
Open and flower and cry we are living. 

************************************************************************** 

Ann Stanford 

(i)  What contrasts are used in the poem? 

(ii)  How effective is the image in line 14? Explain your answer. 

(iii)   How might we relate the demolition of the house and the fate of the bulbs with the life 

of the poet? 

A possible marking scheme 
Candidates may make the following points: 
(i)  –  Between solid house and ruins 
 

Between garden and asphalt 

− 

− 

Between new life and growth and the inability to break through to the surface 

*  

Copyright ©  Ann Stanford. From Holding Our Own: The Selected Poems of Ann Stanford published in 2001 
by Copper Canyon Press. Reproduced by permission of Copper Canyon Press. 

137 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

−    Between life and death 

(ii)   On  the  one  hand,  to  drown  is  to  be  deprived  of  air,  trapped  in  an  alien  medium.  This 

roughly  fits  the  problem  of  the  plants,  though  lack  of  light  is  even  more  important.  On 

the other hand, the idea of the earth and garden under the hard surface being liquid does 

not seem appropriate or enlightening. 

(iii)   –  There seems to be a need for a connection or the poem is very loosely structured. 

−  The poet seems to deplore what has happened; in some way something important to 

the poet has been killed and covered over. 

−  The poet identifies with the living repressed bulbs and wants to shout out “we are 

living”. 

−  There   is   a   possibility   that   the   poem   is   a   protest   against   redevelopment   for 

commercial purposes (car park?). 

Suggested answers 

(i) 

There  is  a  contrast  between  the  solid  house  and  the  ruin  it  turns  into.  There  is  a 

stronger  contrast  in  the  second  verse  between  the  garden,  lovingly  described,  and  the 

barren surface of asphalt that replaces it and makes the soft earth hard. (Note the near 

rhyme  of  “garden”  and  “hardens”).  In  the  third  verse  there  is  a  contrast  between  the 

new  life  in  spring  and  the  paving  that  will  prevent  its  growth.  This  contrast  between 

life and death is further underlined at the end of the poem. 

(ii) 

“That drown in earth”. To drown is to be deprived of air, trapped in an alien medium. 

This roughly fits the problem of the plants, though lack of light is even more important. 

The idea of the earth and garden under the hard surface being liquid does not, however, 

seem appropriate or enlightening. The image is not a very good one. 

(iii) 

It  does  seem  that  there  must  be  a  connection  or  else  the  poem  is  a  very  loosely 

constructed one. It seems that the loss of the old home leaves the poet, to use a similar 

metaphor, rather rootless. Something in the poet’s past has been killed and covered over. 

It  will  find  it  harder  to  express  itself  in  the  new  situation.  Possibly  there  is  a  protest 

against redevelopment for commercial purposes: has the house made way for a car park? 

Certainly  the poet seems to feel  repressed  and wants to shout out with the  bulbs  “we 

are living”. 

138 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Paper 2 

A.        Some notes on writing literary essays 

It is conventional to use the historic present when writing about literary works, e.g. 

z            “Hamlet decides he can no longer trust Ophelia.” 

z            “Marlow almost suffers a nervous breakdown as a result of what he has experienced.” 

Common learner errors are to include long plot summaries rather than short references to the 

text in support of their argument, to branch off into irrelevance, to fail to give a direct answer 

to the question, to misspell critical terms, to concentrate on content at the cost of form, to fail 

to define and clarify terms, to oversimplify, to be unwilling to see faults in set texts, and to 

be highly repetitious. 

Candidates are recommended to examine questions for vague/ambiguous words and to settle 

their  meaning  early  on  (though  not  in  an  arbitrary  way).  Answers  to  questions  9  and  10 

below would, for example, have to pay careful attention to the words “hero” and “failure”. 

A clear statement of the view the candidate wishes to argue is desirable, and paragraphs with 

strong initial topic sentences make for easy reading. 

Quotation is expected in essays on set texts. 

Examples of typical questions on a single text 

1.      Does George Orwell see any hope for humanity in Nineteen Eighty-Four? 

2.      What role does Dr Watson play in the Sherlock Holmes stories? 

3.      What is the significance of fire in Lord of the Flies? 

4.      “Joseph Conrad’s view of woman is a very narrow one.” Discuss this view. 

5. 

“In Dead Poets’ Society Mr Keating’s students have to pay dearly for his egotism.” Do 

you agree? 

6.  Do  you  think  Shakespeare’s  King  Lear  has  anything  to  say  of  relevance  to  modern 

readers? 

7.      What genre of film does The African Queen belong to? 

8.      How does Hitchcock create suspense in Psycho? 

9.      Does The Death of a Salesman have a hero? 

10.  “Ultimately Blade Runner has to be judged a failure.” How far do you agree with this 

statement? 

139 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Notes on the questions 

1.  Part  of  the  art  of  answering  such  questions  is  to  make  distinctions.  Possibly  there  is 

little  political  hope,  but  some  hope  for  and  from  the  working  class.  “Humanity”  is 

ambiguous – it means the human race, and the essential qualities of being human. The 

first  might  survive  without  the  second.  Where  should  the  emphasis  lie  in  the  story  of 

Winston: that he rebels, or that he fails? Does power have to have an Other to exert its 

authority  over?  These  are  all  ways  into  the  question  that  are  more  interesting  than  a 

blanket  yes  or  no.  It  is  possible  that  the  book  itself  is  not  consistent  and  that 

contradictory messages are present. Perhaps Orwell himself wasn’t sure. 

2.  An answer to this might be organised in terms of a number of different roles played by 

Dr Watson: the foil, the buddy, a conversational partner, a plot convenience, a figure of 

fun, a figure of identification, etc. The candidate could select four or five of these and 

produce a paragraph on each with analysis and examples. A poor answer would simply 

try to recount Dr Watson’s actions in a number of stories. 

3.  The  candidate  could  summarise  briefly  a  few  major  occurrences  of  fire  in  the  novel, 

analysing its symbolic importance; or the essay could be organised into paragraphs on 

different  types  of  significance  –  the  fire  as  safety,  as  hope  of  rescue,  as  destroyer,  as 

centre of the power struggle, as savagery and as weapon. Or an overall argument could 

be  developed  about  fire  as  human  energy  with  some  potential  for  good  when  under 

control, but even greater for evil when unleashed. 

4.  With  questions  like  this,  there  is  no  pressure  on  candidates  to  be  on  one  side  or  the 

other  –  in  fact,  the  candidate  might  even  decide  that  discussing  the  point  in  terms  of 

breadth  and  narrowness  may  not  be  a  helpful  one.  An  essay  on  this  topic  could  be 

organised as some points supporting the statement,  followed by some against it, and a 

final  decision;  or  as  a  clear  statement  followed  by  a  strong  argument  on  one  side:  “It 

seems clear to this reader that Conrad’s view of woman was indeed a narrow one, and I 

have five points to make in support of my view.” 

5.  The question relates to Keating’s character (do you agree he is an egotist?), and where 

the blame lies for Niel’s suicide (with his father, himself, the school, Keating…?). The 

careful  candidates  might  like  to  distinguish  between  his/her  view  and  the  film’s  –  i.e. 

that  morally  Keating  must  take  a  lot  of  the  blame,  but  that  Peter  Weir  and  Robin 

Williams draw our attention away from this. 

6. 

 This would probably be best approached as  a question on theme. The candidate could 

identify  major  themes  and  show  they  are  still  applicable.  An  alternative  would  be  to 

attack the question’s implication/assumption that works of art ought to be “relevant”. 

140 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

7. 

 Questions  of  categorisation  often  arise.  As  film  genres  are  not  rigid,  the  answer  will 

probably  be  that  it  is  a  mixture  of  genres.  The  candidate  could  look  at  the  film  as  an 

adventure story, a love story, a patriotic war story, a travel story, even an African or a 

boat  story.  Probably  in  the  last  analysis  the  love  story  prevails  because  of  the 

star-casting. 

8.  This is a technique question and candidates would be expected to discuss plot, music, 

setting, dialogue and so on. 

9.     This  question  involves  character  analysis  and  a  discussion  about  what  makes  a  hero. 

Many  different  answers  could  be  produced:  the  play  is  about  the  impossibility  of 

heroism  in  the  modern  world;  Mrs  Loman  is  the  true  hero;  Arthur  is  a  hero,  full  of 

failings, but the centre of our attention and sympathy; Biff has elements of heroism; or, 

no, the men in the play are despicable. 

10.  Here  the  candidate  is  asked  to  develop  some  basic  principles.  What  exactly  is  a 

successful film? This can be analysed at different levels: 

–     is the storyline clear and coherent? 

–     does everything in the film cohere? 

–     is the film visually beautiful? 

–     is the acting good? 

–     has the film been influential? … and many more. 

B.     Questions asking for a comparison of texts 

Comparing ideas and experiences is intended to help us to clarify our thoughts and establish 

general principles on which judgements can be based. Sometimes the issues which need to 

be discussed are referred to directly in the question, but at others candidates have to search 

for them themselves. Comparisons often involve the expression of taste. Candidates need to 

learn the ability to explain and justify their preferences. Careful consideration must also be 

given  to  the  structure  of  a  comparison  essay.  Will  the  essay  cover  one  topic/set  text,  and 

then move on to  the next,  or will each paragraph follow this structure as various points of 

comparison are discussed in turn? 

Examination  candidates  should  be  made  aware  that  an  examination  question  provides  an 

opportunity  for  a  learner  to  display  his/her  ability  and  knowledge.  A  perfunctory  response 

may  in  a  sense  answer  a  question,  but  the  answer  itself  is  not  as  important  here  as  the 

discussion that leads to it. 

141 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Examples of typical comparison questions 

1.  Which of your set texts has had the biggest impact on you? 

2.  What effects can novels achieve that film cannot? Illustrate your answer with examples 

from your set texts. 

3.  What are the strengths and weaknesses of film as a medium? Discuss in relation to your 

set texts. 

4. 

“Dr Strangelove and Nineteen Eighty-Four have  a great deal in common.” How far do 

you agree with this statement? 

5. 

“Macbeth and  Sense and  Sensibility depend  on  the  same  methods  of  characterisation.” 

Do you agree with this assessment? 

6.  Are  the  differences  or  the  similarities  between  The  Merchant of  Venice and  To  Kill  a 

Mockingbird the more significant? 

7.  Which of your set texts do you think George Orwell would enjoy the most? 

8.  Compare and contrast the styles of narrative in Silas Marner and at least two of the set 

short stories. 

9.  Which  character  in  The  Mosquito  Coast  is  most  similar  to  Mr  Kurtz  in  Heart  of 

Darkness? 

10.   “Casablanca  and   Pride  and  Prejudice  are  romantic  nonsense.”  Comment  on  this 

statement. 

Notes on the questions 

1.  The   question   is   a   personal   response   one,   and   the   candidate   can   be   honest,   but 

non-literary reasons are unlikely to attract many marks and should at most be mentioned 

in passing (e.g. “I didn’t like it because it was full of difficult words.”). As this part of 

the  paper  involves  comparison,  the  candidate  must  ensure  that  some  appears.  One  way 

of organising a response would be to discuss a number of aspects of the chosen text (e.g. 

theme,  language,  character  and  plot),  each  time  establishing  virtues  against  close 

challengers among the other texts. Obviously an attempt to discuss the features of all the 

texts would result in an unwieldy list, not a thoughtful essay. 

2.  The question asks for a comparison of media. The question could best be answered with 

reference  to  hundreds  of  different  novels  and  films,  and  that  is  not  possible  for 

examination.  The  candidate  is  being  asked  to  identify  the  particular  aesthetic  pleasures 

offered  by  the  set  film  and  set  novel,  and  to  see  if  they  are  different  or  not.  An 

awareness  that  the  narrowness  of  the  sample  makes  generalisation  insecure  should  be 

present.  Academic  hedging  (“seems”,  “maybe”,  “perhaps”,  etc.)  suits  much  literary 

criticism. 

3.  This  could  be  interpreted  as  a  question  solely  on  film,  but  that  would  not  bring  in 

comparison, so in context it should be read as an invitation to compare film with verse, 

142 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

stage  drama  and  prose  fiction.  Depending  on  the  set  texts  involved,  candidates  will 

probably  discuss  visual  splendour  and  music,  control  of  the  imagination,  narration, 

length, the expression of emotion and thought, cost and so forth. 

4.  This  question  asks  for  a  direct  comparison  between  two  texts.  Both  are  post-war  texts 

concerned  with  the  bleak  prospect  of  a  world  engaged  in  the  Cold  War  so  soon  after 

years of mass slaughter. Man’s cruelty and drive to dominance appal both writers. Both 

texts  are  interested  in  power  and  politics  and  how  they  distort  human  behaviour.  The 

novel is serious in tone while the film is darkly comic. An answer can begin by pointing 

out the deep similarities and then look at some of the differences (or vice versa). 

5.  The  question  asks  whether  characterisation  is  the  same  in  plays  and  novels.  The 

candidate needs to discuss techniques of characterisation one by one and see if they are 

present in both texts. A lot of examples will be needed. Probably, many of them will be 

found to be the same, though some a little different (e.g. Shakespeare gives us very little 

description of his characters or their dress). 

6.  This  question  is  similar  to  number  four,  although  the  texts  chosen  are  more  disparate 

and  their  conjunction  at  first  glance  more  shocking  (though  not  perhaps  to  the 

well-prepared  candidate).  Obviously,  and  therefore  not  worth  spending  much  time  on, 

the medium (verse drama and prose fiction) and setting are very different, but there are 

interesting  similarities  of  theme  (racism,  father/daughter  relationship,  justice,  victims, 

etc.). There is plenty here for a stimulating essay. Shakespeare’s text  is far more open. 

The candidate can consider whether Portia is another Atticus Finch or not, how innocent 

Shylock  is  and  whether  there  are  other  important  themes  absent  from  one  work  or  the 

other. 

7.  Again  the  candidate  must  ensure  there  is  comparison,  but  not  try  to  cover  too  much 

material  in  the  answer,  e.g.  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  every  set  text.  Having 

established, with evidence, what sort of things might be expected to appeal to Keats, the 

candidate might select the two most promising texts and discuss them in terms of theme 

and style, seeing which suits best each time, and then coming to a final decision. 

8.  This question concerns different uses of a technique. Silas Marner is narrated by a rather 

chatty  and  moralistic  omniscient  narrator.  The  candidate  can  then  find  appropriately 

contrastive narrative techniques in a selection of short stories and, for example, compare 

a more immediate  narrative voice with the more distanced storytelling of Silas Marner. 

The  candidate  would  need  to  know  the  texts  well,  and  discuss  the  different  reading 

experiences. 

9.  The  question  asks  for  the  comparison  of  texts  by  means  of  character  study.  The 

obsessive, ambitious Allie Fox makes for an obvious parallel with Kurtz. Their similar 

143 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

demises  also  reflect  the  failure  of  both  to  achieve  their  aims.  The  candidate  should 

observe the principal difference arising from the characters being tested in very different 

situations. 

10.  The  essay  topic  begs  the  question  of  what  makes  a  good  love  story  as  well  as  whether 

Casablanca and  Pride and  Prejudice are  sufficiently  similar  texts  to  be  compared  (one 

is  a  lightweight  Hollywood  romance  with  an  exotic  and  somewhat  superficial  wartime 

setting, while the other deals with the nature of love and marriage in a more intellectual 

and  realistic  social  context).  Having  established  some  criteria,  the  candidate  can  set 

about  some  detailed  comparison  of  various  selected  aspects  of  the  texts,  and  then 

announce the final choice, or avoidance of choice. 

C.        Question involving an imaginative expansion on a text 

Often such questions involve the assumption of a role (possibly  one of the characters of the 

work or an imagined onlooker or friend). The candidates must think themselves into the role 

demanded  and  present  thoughts,  attitudes  and  ideas  that  can  be  justified  for  that  person. 

Sometimes  supplying  such  a  justification  is  actually  the  second  part  of  these  questions.  The 

form  to  be  adopted  is  likely  to  be  stipulated  in  the  question  (e.g.  a  letter).  The  style  should 

suit  the  speaker/writer.  If  the  character  has  a  certain  style  of  speech  in  the  work  itself,  an 

attempt to imitate it should be made. No one expects, however, this to be taken to extremes. 

Friar Lawrence of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, being interviewed later, does not need to 

speak  in  iambic  pentameter,  but  he  should  speak  as  a  priest  with  religious  references  and 

might be allowed some  archaisms. Similarly, Jay Gatsby and a Jane Austen character would 

be expected to speak rather differently. 

Candidates should avoid story summary. Even if two characters meeting years later or in the 

afterlife might be expected to relate the events of their lives to each other, this should not be 

allowed to take over the piece of writing as it will not gain marks for the candidate. 

Examples of typical imaginative essays 

1.   After  the  end  of  Lord  of  the  Flies an  inquiry  is  held  into  what  happened  on  the  island. 

Write Jack’s statement for the inquiry. 

2.   Bonnie after the end of Bonnie and Clyde enters the afterlife. She is asked to reflect on 

her life. Write her reflections. 

3.   During a search of the house after the end of Psycho a letter written by Mrs Bates in the 

last days of her life, relating to events at the motel, was found. Write the letter. 

4.   Suggests some alternative endings to Othello and discuss their merits and demerits. 

144 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

5.   Say how  you would update one of the Sherlock Holmes short stories to make it credible 

in  contemporary  Hong  Kong,  and  say  how  you  would  make  it  into  a  successful  short 

movie. 

6. 

Imagine  you  could  meet  the  author  of  Beowulf  (assuming  such  a  person  existed).  You 

interview him/her and then use the interview as the basis of a magazine article. Write the 

article. 

7.  Some  time  after  the  end  of  the  novel  Max  de  Winter  has  a  dream  in  which  he  talks  to 

Rebecca about his present life. Write their dialogue. 

8.  Write the front page of the “Glamis Daily Post” for the day following the end of the play 

Macbeth. 

9.  Give a speech to the assembled people of San Piedro after the end of the events of Snow 

Falling on Cedars and tell them what you feel they should have learned from the events. 

10.  Imagine you were one of Sal’s community in The Beach. What would  you have done in 

the final days as things went sour? 

Comments on the questions 

1.  A good answer depends on an understanding of Jack’s psychology. Would he lie and try 

to  blacken  Ralph,  or  push  the  blame  on  to  some  of  his  followers  (all  the  conveniently 

dead  Piggy),  or  be  defiant  and  justify  his  actions?  It  seems  unlikely  he  would  suddenly 

repent.  Jack’s  style  would  need  attention.  If  the  candidate  decided  Jack  would  probably 

make  a  lot  of  spelling  mistakes,  this  could  be  signalled  to  the  marker  as  a  conscious 

decision,  e.g.  [Note:  this  statement  appears  as  Jack  wrote  it,  including  his  unreliable 

spelling. Editor]. 

2.  The temptation to retell the story would need to be resisted. The central point is whether 

Bonnie’s experiences change her. With hindsight, would she have done things differently? 

What are her happiest moments? Does she regret anything? How did she feel towards her 

killers? A feeling for Bonnie’s sense of style would also be needed for a good response. 

3.  This  question  asks  us  to  consider  events  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  character  to  whose 

thoughts  the  film  does  not  make  us  privy  –  but  presumably  Mrs  Bates  was  aware  of 

Norman’s increasing oddity  and  might  have begun to  worry about  where it was leading. 

Possibly she is also a strange person with an idiosyncratic style. 

4.  The candidate is asked to consider whether it would work to save Desdemona at the last 

moment, or whether Othello’s suicide is appropriate. Would it be satisfactory if Othello at 

the last moment could not bear to hurt Desdemona and killed himself in despair instead? 

There would be more justice in this, but would it contradict the rest of the play, go against 

character and generally reduce the drama? 

145 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

5.  This question should not be too difficult. Hong Kong is a great city with its share of crime. 

Some  social  customs  have  changed,  but  others  have  altered  little.  Where  would  Baker 

Street be situated? Are there any actors particularly suited to playing a great and learned 

detective? There is plenty to exercise the imagination on. 

6.  Sometimes  after  reading/viewing  a  text,  our  head  is  full  of  questions.  Dead  authors  are 

not available to us, but we can try to imagine their responses, and if they are far back in 

time, their wonderment at the things we focus on, that may have been peripheral to them. 

(The same approach can be used with a rather impenetrable/silent character.) 

7.  The  question  asks  us  to  judge  how  happy  Max  is  and  at  peace  with  himself.  Would 

Rebecca find his situation worthy of mockery or would she seethe with hate that he had 

avoided  punishment?  The  dialogue  form  gives  plenty  of  opportunity  for  inquiring  about 

reasons for attitudes. An attempt would have to be made to imitate the aristocratic tone of 

Max and Rebecca. 

8.  This  highly  anachronistic  task  gives  scope  for  headlines,  interviews  and  enjoyable 

imaginative tidbits (e.g. more omens, special weather, a sighting of the weird sisters, the 

reaction from London, even advertisements). 

9.  This question allows the candidates to show knowledge of the main themes and messages 

of  the  novel.  Probably  the  speaker  would  want  to  castigate  racism,  and  address  some 

special  words  Kabuo  and  other  major  figures  used  in  the  story,  saying  how  they  should 

now change. 

10.   Similarly,  this  question  gives  an  opportunity  to  make  moral  judgements,  but  also  to  be 

empathetic (e.g. “I would probably have been torn between a desire to help Christo and a 

wish for him to die. I think I would have kept my head and realised humanity had to be 

put before our selfish convenience.”) 

It is clear that questions 9 and 10 both offer occasions for plot summary. Candidates can 

only be successful if they learn to resist this. 

146 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Appendix 5 

Choosing Works to Encourage Wider Reading and Viewing 

The  range  is  so  enormous  that  any  list  immediately  becomes  more  notable  for  its  omissions 

than its inclusions. Thought has to be given to the suitability of the content for learners at the 

senior secondary level, the relevance and accessibility of the material, the length of the work, 

the difficulty of its language, and their connection with the texts that learners are studying. 

Novelists 

•  Achebe, Chinua 
•  Austen, Jane 
•  Alcott, Louisa M. 
•  Atwood, Margaret 
•  Bronte, Charlotte 
•  Bronte, Emily 
•  Byatt, A.S. 
•  Cather, Willa 
•  Chandler, Raymond 
•  Coetzee, J.M. 
•  Conrad, Joseph 

•  Crane, Stephen 

•  Desai, Anita 
•  Dickens, Charles 
•  Du Maurier, Daphne 
•  Eliot, George 
•  Ellison, Ralph 
•  Faulkner, William 
•  Fitzgerald, F. Scott 
•  Ford, Ford Madox 
•  Forster, E.M. 
•  Golding, William 
•  Graves, Robert 
•  Greene, Graham 
•  Grossmith, George 
•  Guterson, David 
•  Hammett, Dashiell 
•  Hardy, Thomas 
•  Hawthorne, Nathaniel 

•  Heller, Joseph 
•  Hughes, Richard 
•  Hemingway, Ernest 
•  Hill, Susan 
•  Huxley, Aldous 
• 
Ishiguro, Kazuo 
•  James, Henry 
•  Jhabvala, Ruth Prawer 
•  Lawrence, D.H. 
•  Harper, Lee 
•  McCullers, Carson 
•  Morrison, Toni 
•  Naipaul, V.S. 
•  Narayan,  R.K. 
•  Orwell, George 
•  Rhys, Jean 
•  Salinger, J.D. 
•  Shelley, Mary 
•  Sinclair, Upton 
•  Spark, Muriel 
•  Steinbeck, John 

•  Swift, Jonathan 

•  Tan, Amy 
•  Twain, Mark 
•  Walker, Alice 
•  Waugh, Evelyn 
•  Wells, H.G. 
•  Woolf, Virginia 

147 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

•  Lawrence, D.H. 
•  Lessing, Doris 
•  London, Jack 
•  Mansfield, Katherine 
•  Maugham, W. Somerset 
•  Oates, Joyce Carol 
•  O’Connor, Flannery 
•  O’Connor, Frank 
•  Parker, Dorothy 
•  Pritchett, V.S. 
•  Saki 
•  Saroyan, William 
•  Stevenson, Robert Louis 
•  Thurber, James 
•  Trevor, W. 
•  Wodehouse, P.G. 
•  Woolf, Virginia 

•  Pinter, Harold 
•  Potter, D. 
•  Russell, Willy 
•  Shakespeare, William 
•  Shaw, Bernard 
•  Soyinka, Wole    
•  Stoppard, Tom 
•  Synge, J.M. 
•  Thomas, Dylan 
•  Wilde, Oscar 
•  Williams, Tennessee 

Short story writers 

•  Auster, Paul 
•  Ballard, J.G. 
•  Bates, H.E. 
•  Bowen, Elizabeth 
•  Bradbury, Ray 
•  Carver, Raymond 
•  Cheever, John 
•  Chesterton, G.K. 
•  Dahl, Roald 
•  Doyle, Arthur Conan 
•  Fitzgerald, F. Scott 
•  Greene, Graham 
•  Hardy, Thomas 
•  Hawthorne, Nathaniel 
•  Hemingway, Ernest 
•  James, Henry 
•  James, M.R. 
•  Joyce, James 

Playwrights 

•  Albee, Edward 
•  Ayckborn, Alan 
•  Beckett, Samuel 
•  Bennett, Alan 
•  Bond, Edward 
•  Eliot, T.S. 
•  Frayn, Michael 
•  Mamet, David 
•  Marlowe, Christopher 
•  Miller, Arthur 
•  O’Casey, Sean 
•  O’Neill, Eugene 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

148 

Poets 

 
 

•  Auden, W.H. 
•  Bishop, Elizabeth 
•  Blake, William 
•  Browning, E.B. 
•  Clare, John 
•  Cope, Wendy 
•  Cummings, E.E. 
•  Day-Lewis, C. 
•  Dickinson, Emily 
•  Dunn, Douglas 
•  Eliot, T.S. 
•  Frost, Robert 
•  Gunn, Thom 
•  Hardy, Thomas 
•  Heaney, Seamus 
•  Hopkins, Gerald Manley 
•  Herbert, George 
•  Hughes, Langston 
•  Hughes, Ted 
•  Jennings, Elizabeth 
•  Keats, John 
•  Larkin, Philip 
•  Lawrence, D.H. 

•  Levertov, Denise 
•  Lindsay, Vachel 
•  Lowell, Robert 
•  McGough, Roger 
•  McNeice, Louis 
•  Mew, Charlotte 
•  Moore, Marianne 
•  Owen, Wilfred 
•  Plath, Sylvia 
•  Roethke, Theodore 
•  Rossetti, Christina 
•  Sandburg, Carl 
•  Sassoon, Siegfried 
•  Smith, Stevie 
•  Stevens, Wallace 
•  Tennyson, Alfred Lord 
•  Thomas, Dylan 
•  Thomas, Edward 
•  Thomas, R.S. 
•  Walcott, Derek 
•  Whitman, Walt 
•  Williams, William Carlos 
•  Yeats, W.B. 

 

149 

Films 

 
 

•  Alien (Scott) 
•  All that Heaven Allows (Sirk) 
•  Apocalypse Now (Coppola) 
•  Back to the Future (Zemeckis) 
•  Basketball Diaries (Kalvert) 
•  The Beach (Boyle) 
•  Bend it like Beckham (Chadha) 
•  Billy Elliot (Daldry) 
•  Blade Runner (Scott) 
•  Bonnie and Clyde (Penn) 
•  Boys Don’t Cry (Pierce) 
•  The Breakfast Club (Hughes) 
•  Casablanca (Curtiz) 
•  Cast Away (Zemeckis) 
•  Chinatown (Polanski) 
•  Citizen Kane (Welles) 
•  Dead Man Walking (Robbins) 
•  The Dead Poets’ Society (Weir) 
•  Don Juan de Marco (Leven) 
•  Edward Scissorhands (Burton) 
•  Finding Forrester (van Sant) 
•  Forrest Gump (Zemeckis) 
•  Four Weddings and a Funeral 

(Newell) 

•  Freaky Friday (Waters) 
•  Francis Ford Coppola’s Dracula 

(Coppola) 

•  The Full Monty (Cattaneo) 
•  Gone with the Wind (Fleming) 
•  High Noon (Zinnemann) 
•  How to Make an American 

Quilt (Moorhouse) 

• 
• 

Icestorm (Lee) 

In the Heat of the Night 

(Jewison) 

It’s a Wonderful Life (Capra) 

• 
•  Jurassic Park (Spielberg) 
•  The Legend of 1900 

(Tornatore) 

•  Mr Holland’s Opus (Herek) 
•  Moulin Rouge (Luhrman) 
•  On the Waterfront (Kazan) 
•  Pleasantville (Ross) 
•  Psycho (Hitchcock) 
•  The Purple Rose of Cairo 

(Allan) 

•  Rear Window (Hitchcock) 
•  Rebel Without a Cause (Ray) 
•  Road to Perdition (Mendes) 
•  Saving Private Ryan 

(Spielberg) 

•  Shakespeare in Love (Madden) 
•  The Sixth Sense (Shyamalan) 
•  Sliding Doors (Howitt) 
•  Slingblade (Thornton) 
•  Straight Story (Lynch) 
•  The Terminator (Cameron) 
•  The Third Man (Reed) 
•  This Boy’s Life (Caton-Jones) 
•  2001 – a Space Odyssey 

(Kubrick) 

•  Vertigo (Hitchcock) 
•  White Squall (Scott) 
•  The World of Suzie Wong 

(Quine) 

 

150 

Glossary 

Term 

Description 

Assessment objectives       The  outcomes  of  the  curriculum  to  be  assessed  in  the  public 

assessments. 

Co-construction 

Different  from  the  direct  instruction  and  construction  approaches 
to 
learning    and    teaching,    the    co-construction    approach 
emphasises  the  class  as  a  community  of  learners  who  contribute 
collectively  to  the  creation  of  knowledge  and  the  building  of 
criteria for judging such knowledge. 

Curriculum and 
Assessment (C&A) Guide 

A guide  prepared  by  the  CDC-HKEAA Committee.  It  comprises 
curriculum  aims/objectives/contents, 
learning  outcomes,  and 
assessment guidelines. 

Generic skills                  Generic   skills   are   skills,   abilities   and   attributes   which   are 
fundamental  in  helping  students  to  acquire,  construct  and  apply 
knowledge.  They   are   developed   through   the   learning   and 
teaching  that  take  place  in  different  subjects  or  key  learning 
areas,  and  are  transferable  to  different  learning  situations.    Nine 
types  of  generic  skills  are  identified  in  the  Hong  Kong  school 
curriculum, 
i.e.  collaboration  skills,  communication  skills, 
creativity,  critical  thinking  skills,  information  technology  skills, 
numeracy  skills,  problem  solving  skills,  self-management  skills 
and study skills. 

Hong Kong Diploma of 
Secondary Education 
(HKDSE) 

The  qualification  to  be  awarded  to  students  after  completing  the 
three-year  senior  secondary  curriculum  and  taking  the  public 
assessment. 

Internal assessment           This refers  to the assessment activities that are conducted regularly 
in  school  to  assess  students’  performance  in  learning.  Internal 
assessment  is  an  inseparable  part  of  the  learning  and  teaching 
process,  and  it  aims  to  make  learning  more  effective.  With  the 
information  that  internal  assessment  provides,  teachers  will  be 
able  to  understand  students’  progress  in  learning,  provide  them 
with  appropriate  feedback  and  make  any  adjustments  to  the 
learning objectives and teaching strategies they deem necessary. 

151 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Term 

 

Description 

Key  learning  area  (KLA)  A  way  of  organising  the  school  curriculum  around  fundamental 
concepts  of  major  knowledge  domains.  It  aims  at  providing  a 
broad,  balanced  and  coherent  curriculum  for  all  students  through 
engaging them in a variety of essential learning experiences. The 
Hong  Kong  curriculum  has  eight  KLAs,  namely,  Chinese 
Language  Education,  English  Language  Education,  Mathematics 
Education,  Personal,  Social  and  Humanities  Education,  Science 
Education,  Technology  Education,  Arts  Education  and  Physical 
Education. 

Knowledge construction   This  refers  to  the  process  of  learning  in  which  learners  are 
involved  not  only  in  acquiring  new  knowledge,  but  also  in 
actively  relating  it  to  their  prior  knowledge  and  experience  so  as 
to create and form their own knowledge. 

Learner diversity             Learners are individuals with varied family, social, economic and 
cultural  backgrounds   and   learning   experience.   They   have 
different  talents,  personalities,  intelligence  and  interests.      Their 
learning abilities, interests and styles are, therefore, diverse. 

Learning  community            A  learning  community  refers  to  a  group  of  people  who  have 
shared  values  and  goals,  and  who  work  closely  together  to 
generate  knowledge  and  create  new  ways  of  learning  through 
active  participation,  collaboration  and  reflection.  Such  a  learning 
community  may  involve  not  only  students  and  teachers,  but  also 
parents and other parties in the community. 

Learning outcomes           Learning outcomes refer to what learners should be able to do by 
the  end  of  a  particular  stage  of  learning.  Learning  outcomes  are 
developed  based  on  the  learning  targets  and  objectives  of  the 
curriculum  for  the  purpose  of  evaluating  learning  effectiveness. 
Learning  outcomes  also  describe  the  levels  of  performance  that 
learners  should  attain  after  completing  a  particular  key  stage  of 
learning and serve as a tool for promoting learning and teaching. 

Learning targets and 
learning objectives 

Learning  targets  set  out  broadly  the  knowledge/concepts,  skills, 
values and attitudes that students need to learn and develop. 
 
Learning   objectives   define   specifically   what   students   should 
know,  value  and  be  able  to  do  in  each  strand  of  the  subject  in 
accordance  with  the  broad  subject  targets  at  each  key  stage  of 
schooling.  They  are  to  be  used  by  teachers  as  a  source  list  for 
curriculum, lesson and activity planning. 

152 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Term 

Description 

Level descriptors             A  set   of   written   descriptions   that   describe   what   the  typical 
candidates  performing  at  a  certain  level  is  able  to  do  in  public 
assessments. 

Public assessment 

The associated assessment and examination system for the Hong 
Kong Diploma of Secondary Education. 

School-based assessment 
(SBA) 

Assessments  administered  in  schools  as  part  of  the  learning  and 
teaching  process,  with  students  being  assessed  by  their  subject 
teachers.  Marks  awarded  will  count  towards  students’  public 
assessment results. 

School-based  curriculum    Schools   and   teachers   are   encouraged   to   adapt   the   central 
curriculum to develop their school-based curriculum to help their 
students  to  achieve  the  subject  targets  and  overall  aims  of 
education. Measures may include readjusting the learning targets, 
varying  the  organisation  of  contents,  adding  optional  studies  and 
adapting   learning,   teaching   and   assessment   strategies.      A 
school-based  curriculum  is  therefore  the  outcome  of  a  balance 
between  official  recommendations  and  the  autonomy  of  the 
schools and teachers. 

Standards-referenced 
reporting 

Candidates’  performance   in   public   assessment   is   reported   in 
terms of levels of performance matched against a set of standards. 

Student learning profile    Its   purpose   is   to   provide   supplementary   information   on   the 
secondary  school  leavers’  participation  and  specialties  during 
senior secondary years, in addition to their academic performance 
as  reported  in  the  Hong  Kong  Diploma  of  Secondary  Education, 
including  the  assessment  results  for  Applied  Learning  courses, 
thus  giving  a  fuller  picture  of  the  student’s  whole-person 
development. 

Values  and  attitudes              Values  constitute  the  foundation  of  the  attitudes  and  beliefs  that 
influence  one’s  behaviour  and  way  of  life.  They  help  form 
principles  underlying  human  conduct  and  critical  judgement,  and 
are  qualities  that  learners  should  develop.  Some  examples  of 
values  are  rights  and  responsibilities,  commitment,  honesty  and 
national  identity.  Closely  associated  with  values  are  attitudes. 
The  latter  supports  motivation  and  cognitive  functioning,  and 
affects  one’s  way  of  reacting  to  events  or  situations.  Since  both 
values  and  attitudes  significantly  affect  the  way  a  student  learns, 
they form an important part of the school curriculum. 

153 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

(Blank  page) 

 

154 

References 

Curriculum Development 

ACT Board of Senior Secondary Studies (Australia) 

http://www.decs.act.gov.au/bsss/frameworks.htm 

Board of Studies New South Wales 

http://www.boardofstudies.nsw.edu.au/ 

Cross, K. Patricia. (1988). Why Learning Communities? Why Now? 

http://saweb.memphis.edu/mimsac/downloads/CrossLC.pdf 

Curriculum Planning and Development Division, Ministry of Education, Singapore 

http://www.moe.gov.sg 

Education Commission. (2000). Learning for Life, Learning through Life: Reform Proposals 

for the Education in Hong Kong. 

Education Department. (1995). CDC Syllabus for English Literature (Secondary 4 – 5). Hong 

Kong: Curriculum Development Council. 

Education Department. (1995). CDC Syllabus for English Literature (AS Level). Hong Kong: 

Curriculum Development Council. 

Education Department. (1995). CDC Syllabus for English Literature (A Level). Hong Kong: 

Curriculum Development Council. 

Education Department. (2001). Learning to Learn – The Way Forward in Curriculum. Hong 

Kong: Curriculum Development Council. 

Education  Department.  (2002).  CDC  English  Language  Education  Key  Learning  Area 

Curriculum Guide (P1 – S3). Hong Kong: Curriculum Development Council. 

Education and Manpower Bureau. (2002). Basic Education Curriculum Guide – Building on 

Strengths (P1 – S3).  Hong Kong: Curriculum Development Council. 

Education and Manpower Bureau. (2007). Senior Secondary Curriculum Guide. Hong Kong: 

Curriculum Development Council. 

155 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme 

http://www.ibo.org 

International  General  Certificate  of  Secondary  Education  (IGCSE)  for  English  Literature 

http://www.cie.org.uk/ 

Ministry of Education, Ontario, Canada 

http://www.ocea.on.ca/Ministry/Curriculum/english.pdf 

Morris,  P.  (1995).  The  Hong  Kong  School  Curriculum:  Development,  Issues  and  Policies. 

Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 

Victorian Curriculum and Assessment (Australia) 

http://www.vcaa.vic.edu.au/curriculum.html 

Teaching of Literature 

Brumfit,  C.,  &  Carter,  R.  (1986).  Literature  and  Language  Teaching.  Oxford:  Oxford 

University Press. 

Childs,  T  &  Moore,  J.  (2000).  AS  English  Literature  for  AQA  B.  Oxford:  Heinemann 

Educational. 

Collie, J., & Slater, S. (1987). Literature in the Language Classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge 

University Press. 

Cook, G. (1994). Discourse and Literature: the Interplay of Form and Mind. Oxford: Oxford 

University Press. 

Cornett,  C.  (2003).  Creating  Meaning  Through  Literature  and  the  Arts:  An  Integration 

Resource for Classroom Teachers. New Jersey: Merrill/Prentice-Hall. 

Eagleton, T. (1996). Literary Theory: An Introduction. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 

Press. 

Education and Manpower Bureau. (2002). The Learning and Teaching of Poetry (Secondary 

1 – 3): A Resource Package. Hong Kong: Curriculum Development Institute. 

Education  and  Manpower  Bureau.  (2005).  The  Learning  and  Teaching  of  Poetry  (Senior 

Secondary): A Resource Package. Hong Kong: Curriculum Development Institute. 

Falvey,   P.,   &   Kennedy,   P.   (Eds.).   (1997).   Learning   Language   through   Literature:   A 

156 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Sourcebook  for  Teachers  of  English  in  Hong  Kong.  Hong  Kong:  Hong  Kong  University 

Press. 

Falvey, P., & Kennedy, P. (Eds.). (1997). Learning Language through Literature in Secondary 

Schools:  A  Resource  Book  for  Teachers  of  English.  Hong  Kong:  Hong  Kong  University 

Press. 

Holmes,  V.  &  Moulton,  M.  (2001).  Writing  Simple  Poems:  Pattern  Poetry  for  Language 

Acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

 

Keen, S. (2003). Narrative Form. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Lazar, Gillian. (1993). Literature and Language Teaching: A Guide for Teachers and Trainers. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Lennard,  J.  and  Luckhurst,  M.  (2002).  The  Drama  Handbook:  A  Guide  to  Reading  Plays. 

Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Maley, A. & Duff, A. (1983). Drama Techniques in Language Learning: A Resource Book of 

Communication Activities for Language Teachers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Marsh,   N.   (2001).   How   to   begin   Studying   English   Literature.   Hampshire:   Palgrave 

Macmillan. 

Peck, J. & Coyle, M. (2002). Literary Terms and Criticism. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Peck, J. & Coyle, M. (1995). Practical Criticism. Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Pinsky, R. (1999). The Sounds of Poetry: A Brief Guide. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. 

Teaching English – Literature, British Council, BBC 

http://www.teachingenglish.org.uk/think/literature.shtml 

Vendler, H. (1988). The Music of What Happens: Poems, Poets and Critics. Massachusetts: 

Harvard University Press. 

Verdonk, P. (2002). Stylistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Widdowson,  H.  G.  (1992).  Practical  Stylistics:  An  Approach  to  Poetry.  Oxford:  Oxford 

University Press. 

Williamson,  A.  (1995).  Eloquence  and  Mere  Life:  Essays  on  the  Art  of  Poetry.  Michigan: 

157 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

University of Michigan Press. 

 
Film Studies 

The Internet Movie Database 

http://www.imdb.com/ 

The British Film Institute 

http://www.bfi.org.uk/ 

The Daily Script 

http://www.dailyscript.com/ 

Movie Scripts and Screenplays 

http://www.moviescriptsandscreenplays.com/ 

Simply Scripts 

http://www.simplyscripts.com/ 

Screentalk 

http://www.screentalk.biz/moviescripts.htm 

Drew’s Script-O-Rama 

http://www.script-o-rama.com/ 

Script Crawler 

http://www.scriptcrawler.net/ 

Assessment 

Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998a). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education, 

5(1), 7-74. 

Black,  P.,  &  Wiliam,  D.  (1998b).  Inside  the  black  box:  Raising  standards  through  classroom 

assessment. Phi Delta Kappan, October, 139-148. 

Stiggins,  R.  (2004).  New  assessment  beliefs  for  a  new  school  mission.  Phi  Delta  Kappan, 

86(1), 22-27. 

158 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

Membership of the CDC-HKEAA Committee 
on Literature in English (Senior Secondary) 

(From December 2003 to September 2013) 

Chairperson: 

Ms Carrie LI 

Members: 

Ms CHAN Shin-kwan, Meimei 

Ms Theresa CUNANAN 

Dr Fiona HYLAND 

 

 

(until June 2006) 

Dr Michael Anthony INGHAM 

 

Ms LEUNG Wai-ping, 

(from September 2012) 

Kadence 

Mrs Catherine LI 

Ms LIN Mau-tong, Kitty 

Mr Joe ODDIE 
Ms Suzanne WONG 

Ex-officio Members:  Ms CHAN Yin-ping, Cindy (EDB)  

 

 

 

 

(from February 2007) 

(from December 2006 
to June 2012)  

(from July 2012) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

Mrs CHONG Cheung Wai-mun, 
Rosana 

Mr NG Kar-man, Raymond (EDB) 
Dr Neil DRAVE (HKEAA) 
Mr Graham KENNEDY (HKEAA) 

(until November 2006) 

(from September 2013) 

(until August 2013) 

Secretary: 

Ms SIU Wing-see, Lelia (EDB)  

 

 

 

Ms SHU Man-wah, Amy (EDB) 

 Ms WONG Fong-ting, Elizabeth 
(EDB) 

(from December 2006 
to April 2012)  

(until November 2006) 

(from May 2012) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Membership of the CDC-HKEAA Committee on  

Literature in English 

 

(From September 2013 – August 2015) 

 

 
Chairperson: 

Ms CHAN Shin-kwan, Meimei 

 

 

Members: 

Ms Alice CHAN 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Dr CHANG Tsung-chi, Hawk  

Prof Stuart Colin Fraser CHRISTIE 

Ms Terri DONLON 

Dr Fiona HYLAND 

Mrs Catherine LI 

Mr Neil MAXWELL 

Ms Mandy MOK 

Prof Eddie TAY 

Ms Helen WONG 

 

Ex-officio Members:  Mrs CHONG CHEUNG Wai-mun, Rosana  (EDB) 

 

 

Dr Neil DRAVE  (HKEAA) 

 

Secretary: 

Ms Elizabeth WONG  (EDB) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

