Masaryk University 

 

Faculty of Education 

 

DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE  

AND LITERATURE 

 

 

 

 

 

A Grammar Practice Book  

for Adult Beginner Learners of English 

 

Bachelor Thesis 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Brno 2008 

 

 

 

 

 

Thesis Supervisor: 

Thesis Author: 

Mgr. Irena Hůlková 

Klára Okurková 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Declaration 

I  declare  that  I  have  worked  on  the  present  thesis  on  my  own  and  used  only 

the sources listed in the reference. 

I agree that the thesis be deposited at Masaryk University in the library of the Faculty 

of Education and made accessible for study purposes. I also agree that the thesis be stored in 

the university retrieval systems and used for the same purposes. 

 

 

 

........................................................ 

Author’s signature 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acknowledgements 

I would like to express my thanks to Mgr. Irena Hůlková for her kind help, guidance, 

inspirational comments, interest, and time that she devoted to me and to the present work as 

my supervisor. 

 

Contents 

Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 2 

1 Theoretical part ....................................................................................................................... 3 

1.1 What is grammar? ............................................................................................................ 3 

1.2 Grammar teaching throughout history ............................................................................. 5 

1.2.1 The changing position of grammar ........................................................................... 5 

1.2.2 Learning from the history .......................................................................................... 7 

1.3 How to present grammar ................................................................................................ 10 

1.3.1 Grammar presentation principles ............................................................................ 11 

1.3.2 Deductive and inductive approach .......................................................................... 12 

1.4 How to practise grammar ............................................................................................... 13 

1.4.1 Types of exercises ................................................................................................... 14 

1.5 The characteristics and needs of the target group .......................................................... 17 

1.5.1 Adult learners .......................................................................................................... 18 

1.5.2 Students with SLD .................................................................................................. 20 

2 Practical part .......................................................................................................................... 23 

2.1 Grammar for beginners .................................................................................................. 23 

2.2 The organization of the grammar workbook .................................................................. 26 

2.2.1 Decisions regarding the whole workbook ............................................................... 26 

2.2.2 Decisions regarding individual units ....................................................................... 28 

2.3 The grammar workbook ................................................................................................. 32 

2.3.1 Unit 1 – a/an ............................................................................................................ 32 

2.3.2 Unit 2 – plurals of nouns (car/cars) ......................................................................... 35 

2.3.3 Unit 3 – forms of to be (am/is/are) .......................................................................... 39 

2.3.4 Unit 4 – possessive adjectives (my, your, her ...) .................................................... 42 

2.4 Portfolio .......................................................................................................................... 45 

2.5 Key to the grammar workbook ....................................................................................... 46 

Conclusion ................................................................................................................................ 53 

Resumé ..................................................................................................................................... 54 

Summary .................................................................................................................................. 54 

Appendices ............................................................................................................................... 57 

 

1 

 

Introduction 

There  are  many  books,  workbooks,  and  additional  materials  that  are  intentionally 

made for adults. These books usually offer rather a fast speed and wide range of vocabulary 

so that the learners make significant progress and are able to use English fluently as soon as 

possible.  

But what if there is an adult learner who learns English despite the fact that they have 

never been really bright, or is just not apt at languages? A learner who wants to speak English 

and read in English so that the life in the modern anglicised society is a bit easier for them? 

A learner  who  is  still  a  beginner  and  tries  hard  to  absorb  at  least  something,  and  still  finds 

English  very  difficult? I  believe  there  are  many  learners  who  fit  these characteristics,  and  I 

assume  that  they  need  to  make  slow  progress,  with  a  good  practice  of  anything  they  learn. 

They  need  well-prepared,  slow-going  materials  that  would  enable  them  to  practise  English 

even  out  of  classes.  Of  all  the  systems  and  skills  these  learners  need  to  practise,  I  chose 

to devote the present thesis to the investigation of grammar practice. 

I have not found self-study grammar practice materials that would really meet needs 

of the adults  described  above.  These  learners  need  to  practise  the  target  language  item 

thoroughly before they proceed to the next one but the traditional materials usually dedicate 

just one page to practice. They need to be motivated to work with the self-study materials but 

the materials are usually not very attractive, as they do not include many game-like exercises 

and activities. And lastly, learners want to learn to speak and read, but the self-study materials 

usually do not practise these skills very much. Generally speaking, it seems that the traditional 

approach on its own cannot be very effective with these learners, and it might be a good idea 

to combine it with the communicative approach.  

The absence of a wanted grammar practice book was the main reason why grammar 

became the topic of the present thesis. Its aim is to provide adult learners who are beginners 

or elementary learners with well-structured slow-going materials which they could use out of 

their general English classes. These materials should – besides traditional exercises – contain 

something more interesting, more communicative, and hopefully more useful. As a means to 

this  goal,  the  present  thesis  offers  theoretical  background  and  a  few  example  units  that  can 

help grammar book authors create the missing materials one day. 

2 

 

1 Theoretical part 

1.1 What is grammar? 

According to Thornbury, grammar is not only the study of what forms (sounds, words, 

sentences, texts) are possible in a language, but also the study of the  meanings these forms 

convey  (1999,  1,  3).  These  two  parts  of  grammar  can  be  simply  called  ‘grammatical 

structures’ and ‘grammatical meaning’ (Ur 1996, 75-6).  

Grammatical structures 

Grammatical  structures  are  texts,  sentences,  words  and  sounds.  In  linguistic 

metalanguage, these are called morphology and syntax, where morphology means a study of 

the form of words and syntax means a study of the way words and phrases are put together to 

form  sentences  (Hornby  2000,  827,  1319).  Here  are  some  examples  of  grammatical 

structures:  plurals  of  nouns  (e.g.  house  –  houses,  or  mouse  –  mice),  countability  (e.g.  How 

much money? but How many coins?), present simple tense, and others.  

All EFL and ESL teachers need to be aware of the fact that “not all languages ... have 

the  same  structures”  (Ur  1996,  75).  To  illustrate  this,  let  me  compare  English  and  Czech. 

Whereas Czech nouns have seven cases, English nouns have just two: common and genitive 

(terminology by Quirk and Greenbaum 1990, 102), and where Czech distinguishes things of 

feminine,  masculine,  or  neuter  gender,  English  uses  only  the  neutral  pronoun  it.  Moreover, 

there  are  also  structures  that  are  present  in  English  and  absent  in  Czech,  such  as  perfect 

tenses,  or  the  use  of  articles.  Moreover,  it  is  not  only  the  question  of  existence  or  non-

existence  of  various  structures  in  a  language;  it  is  also  their  distribution  that  makes 

a significant difference. A conclusion that Ur makes then is that those structures that are not 

present, or just less frequent, in a mother tongue tend to cause any learner more trouble than 

those structures he or she is used to (1996, 75).  

Grammatical meaning 

As  mentioned  above,  the  other  part  of  the  broad  term  ‘grammar’  is  grammatical 

meaning.  As  Thornbury  puts  it,  meanings  can  be  communicated  even  without  grammar  if 

there is enough context in the situation (1999, 3-4). For example, if a foreigner is thirsty, it is 

a part of their present situation. Therefore, if they say something like Thirsty! Drink! they will 

probably be given a drink even without knowing the structures needed.  

Yet with almost all written (and sometimes even with spoken) utterances, there is not 

enough context, and therefore, grammar needs to be used to communicate the meanings we 

3 

 

mean. This can be illustrated on the example of the foreigner mentioned above. If he or she 

had a wish to talk about this experience the next day and used the same words, the meaning 

would  be  out  of  the  context  of  the  situation.  In  this  case  he  or  she  would  probably  be  just 

given a drink again and would be upset about not being able to communicate their ideas. He 

or  she  would  have  needed  to  use  the  correct  sentence  structures  (with  sentence  elements  in 

their proper places) and the correct forms of the verbs (in this case the past tense form). In 

other words, sometimes it is essential to use correct grammatical structures and to use those 

structures that convey the right meaning. Otherwise it would not be clear what the message of 

the communication was. 

4 

 

1.2 Grammar teaching throughout history 

From what has been said so far, it seems obvious that grammar is an essential part of 

language  learning,  and  that  no  one  can  have  a  claim  against  teaching  it.  Still,  the  position 

of grammar  teaching  has  changed  a  lot  over  the  years.  The  present  chapter  gives  a  brief 

summary of the changes and lists several opinions connected with grammar teaching. 

 

1.2.1 The changing position of grammar 

The  position  of  grammar  in  language  teaching  was  stable  for  quite  a  long  period  of 

time. Rutherford even says that “teaching grammar has been central to and often synonymous 

with teaching foreign language for the past 2,500 years” (In Celce Murcia 1988, 1). 

This grammar teaching approach used especially to teach and learn Latin and Greek 

(Thanasoulas,  EnglishClub.com  2002),  and  it  focused  on  teaching  reading  and  writing. 

As a classical  language,  Latin  was  not  often  spoken,  so  there  was  no  need  to  pay  much 

attention  to  teaching  listening  or  speaking.  However,  with  learning  modern  languages, 

the situation  is  different.  It  is  strange  that  linguists  and  then  teachers  started  emphasizing 

the communicative  skills  only  as  late  as  in  the  last  two  decades  of  the  nineteenth  century 

(ibid.).  

With  many changes in technology, science, arts, and many other fields, people were 

fonder of trying new ways of doing things than they were in the earlier centuries. Even though 

with some students the old method worked well, there was a good chance of finding a new 

method that would work for more students, and maybe even better (less stress, faster progress, 

etc.) It was a revolutionary time. And soon the revolutionary changes took place in language 

learning theories as well. 

Linguists  discovered  that  natural  language  acquisition  could  be  applied  to  learning 

a foreign language. Both teachers and linguists had many new ideas. They were trying to find 

the  best  way  to  teach  languages.  During  the  second  half  of  the  twentieth  century  more 

methods (including Total Physical Response, Suggestopedia, The Silent Way, etc.) came into 

existence  than  ever  before.  Numerous  methods  just  came  and  went.  Some  methods  gained 

stable  popularity.  Approaches  that  became  very  popular  in  the  last  century  are  called 

the Communicative  and  the  Natural  approach  and,  as  Thanasoulas  says,  they  “transcendent 

the  boundaries  of  concrete  methods”  (ibid.).  It  is  these  approaches  that  detest  grammar 

5 

 

teaching as a means of language learning: “The effects of grammar teaching ... appear to be 

peripheral and fragile” (Krashen In Thornbury 1996, 14). 

Thornbury aptly captured the changes in language teaching by saying that its history 

“is  essentially  the  history  of  claims  and  counterclaims  for  and  against  the  teaching  of 

grammar  (ibid.)”.  It  seems  that  at  first  the role of  grammar  was  stressed  (one  extreme)  and 

later it was underestimated (the opposite extreme). Extremes are usually not worth following, 

because the truth is often somewhere in between. Therefore, the current position of grammar 

is  influenced  by  attempts  to  find  the  right  balance  between  grammar-based  approach  and 

grammar-omitting approach. 

 

6 

 

1.2.2 Learning from the history 

It is usually very difficult to create something completely new and be conscious of all 

the aspects that need to be taken into account. An old saying assures us that this is normal: 

“No man is born wise or learned.” Fortunately, we do not need to figure everything out just 

by  ourselves.  We  can  use  other  people’s  ideas  and  experiences.  Therefore,  not  even  a 

grammar  book  author  needs  to anticipate  and  guess  all  the  problems  that  might  affect  the 

learning process of the people using his or her book. He or she can look into the history and 

read  about  what  other  language  teachers  viewed  as  important,  and  consequently,  what  the 

author needs to consider. 

This  subchapter  deals  with  opinions  on  grammar  teaching,  taken  out  of  the 

descriptions  of  several  language  teaching  methods  and  approaches  of  the  past.  These 

descriptions were chosen according to their relevance to the topic of the present thesis. It is to 

function as a source of inspiration and as an impulse for serious thought about what is vital 

to consider when presenting and practising grammar.  

Before methods 

In the nineteenth century, Seidenstrücker, German author of language books, “divided 

his  text  carefully  into  two  parts,  one  giving  the  rules  and  necessary  paradigms,  the  other 

giving French sentences for translation into German and German sentences for translation into 

French” (Richards and Rodgers 2001, 5). The separation of presentation and practice seems 

a vital decision and most grammar books nowadays follow this pattern, some even dedicate 

one  entire  page  to  explanations  and  another  page  to  exercises  (although,  unlike  those  by 

Seidenstrücker, these exercises are not just translations).  

The Grammar-Translation Method 

This  was  the  first  method  that  emerged,  and  in  fact  it  was  rather  just  systematized 

version  of  the  old  approach  to  language  teaching.  However,  it  is  worth  pointing  out 

the following two aspects of Grammar-Translation Method. The first one is, that “grammar is 

taught  deductively  –  that  is,  by  presentation  and  study  of  grammar  rules,  which  are  then 

practiced through translation exercises” (Richards and Rodgers 2001, 6), and the second one 

is, that “the student’s native language is the medium of instruction” (ibid.).  

The Direct Method 

The  Direct  Method  was  the  best  known  method  based  on  the  Natural  Approach 

(a paragraph  on  this  approach  is  included  later  in  the  text).  This  method  taught  grammar 

inductively,  and  instruction  was  given  only  in  the  target  language  (Richards  and  Rodgers 

7 

 

2001, 12). Although this method “rejected explicit grammar teaching”, it followed “a syllabus 

of  grammar  structures”  (Thornbury  1999,  21).  In  this  method,  the  learners  “picked  up 

the grammar in much the same way as children pick up the grammar of their mother tongue, 

simply by being immersed in language” (ibid.). 

Situational Language Teaching 

Situational  Language  Teaching  is  an  approach  based  on  applied  linguistics  of 

the 1930s  to  1960s.  Sometimes  it  is  also  called  the  Oral  Approach.  Palmer,  a  language 

teaching  specialist,  “viewed  grammar  as  the  underlying  patterns  of  the  spoken  language” 

(Richards and Rodgers 2001, 37). In real teaching this meant adhering to a grammar syllabus 

which  had  the  grammatical  structures  ‘hidden’  behind  “sentence  patterns,  which  could  be 

used  to  help  internalize  the  rules  of  English  sentence  structure”  (ibid.,  38).  It  cannot  be 

doubted  that  sentence  that  carries  certain  meaning  is  sometimes  easier  to  internalize,  than 

an emotionally  uncharged  rule.  Therefore,  is  highly  recommendable  for  a  grammar  book  to 

include  a  clearly  visible  sentence  structure  (written  in  different  colour,  bold  print,  unusual 

font or font size, or used next to or within a picture). On the other hand, this structure does not 

need to replace the grammar rule.  

Communicative Language Teaching 

In Britain, Situational Language Teaching (SLT) was the major approach to teaching 

until  the  1960’s.  After  the  principles  of  SLT  were  questioned,  Communicative  Language 

Teaching (CLT) started to be largely accepted. (Richards and Rodgers 2001, 153-4)  

This  approach  allows  grammatical  explanation,  if  it  helps  the  learners.  This  varies 

according  to  the  learners’  age,  interest,  and  similar  criteria.  The  approach  also  accepts 

“judicious  use  of  native  language  where  feasible”  and  “translation  may  be  used  where 

students need or benefit from it” (Finocchiaro and Brumbit In Richards and Rodgers, 156). 

Thornbury  distinguishes  between  ‘Deep-end  CLT’,  which  rejected  both  grammar 

syllabuses  and  grammar  instruction,  and  ‘Shallow-end  CLT’,  where  “grammar  was  still  the 

main component of the syllabus”, only it was “dressed up in functional labels” (1999, 22). He 

also points out that Chomsky’s idea that “language, rather than being a habit structure, was 

instead  rule-governed  creativity”  (ibid.,  51)  was  absorbed  by  the  Shallow-end  CLT, 

and “grammar  rules  reappeared 

in  coursebooks,  and  grammar 

teaching  re-emerged 

in classrooms,  often,  it  must  be  said,  at  the  expense  of  communicative  practice”  (ibid.). 

It cannot  be  doubted  that  communicative  practice  is  more  useful  than  knowledge  of  rules. 

However, sometimes the rules can help us choose more effective ways to communicate our 

ideas. The present thesis tries to combine both approaches.  

8 

 

The Natural Approach 

The Natural Approach was an attempt to put researcher’s studies of second language 

acquisition into practice. The principles of the approach were formed by Terrel and Krashen, 

and  appeared  in  their  book  The  Natural  Approach  (Richards  and  Rodgers  2001,  178).  The 

approach  consists  of  five  hypotheses,  which  “have  obvious  implications  for  language 

teaching” (ibid., 183). One of the implications is, in the wording of Richards and Rogers, that 

“as  much  comprehensible  input  as  possible  must  be  presented”  (ibid.).  In  the  case  of 

a workbook,  such  an  input  can  be  offered  by  texts  to  read.  A  grammar-book  author  should 

consider this, and might like the idea of inserting pages with stories (or other text types) that 

would  use  the  grammar  points  presented  on  the  preceding  pages  as  a  form  of  their 

consolidation. Another possibility is to include a CD with listenings. 

Task-Based Language Teaching 

Chapter  on  Task-Based  Language  Teaching  in  the  book  by  Richards  and  Rogers 

presents  the  idea  that  “activities  and  tasks  can  be  either  those  that  learners  might  need  to 

achieve in real life, or those that have a pedagogical purpose specific to the classroom” (2001, 

224).  Nonetheless,  it  should  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  “language  that  is  meaningful  to 

the learner supports the learning process” (ibid., 223). To sum up, teacher can use whatever 

he  or  she  feels  students  will  benefit  from,  but  it  is  vital  that  learners  see  the  purpose 

of the presented language point or activity. In a grammar book this could for example mean 

that  the  language  used  reflects  real  life  situations  in  which  learners  can  find  themselves  in 

the future, or that it contains a good preface explaining some of the reasons why the book is 

useful for its users. 

9 

 

1.3 How to present grammar 

Grammar is usually presented orally. As a result, books on grammar teaching discuss 

techniques suitable for oral presentation but unsuitable for a grammar workbook. Therefore, 

the  present  chapter  does  not  deal  with  individual  techniques.  It  only  summarizes  the  most 

important  presentation  principles  and  offers  a  brief  insight  into  two  grammar  teaching 

approaches. 

Both  Thornbury  (1999)  and  Harmer  (1987)  distinguish  three  basic  ways  to  present 

grammar: from rules, from examples, and through texts. The first two ways are two different 

approaches  to  explain  grammar.  The  third  way  often  accompanies  the  first  two.  Teaching 

grammar through texts is often used in general English coursebooks. The learners read a text 

which gives examples of the grammar point. It is a good opportunity to see the grammar point 

in its context (Thornbury 1999, 69-73). Teaching grammar from rules and from examples is 

discussed in a separate subchapter (1.3.2). 

10 

 

1.3.1 Grammar presentation principles 

The  following  presentation  principles  are  a  choice  of  principles  stated  in  Harmer’s 

book  Teaching  and  learning  grammar  (1987,  18)  and  Thornbury’s  book  How  to  teach 

grammar (1999, 25-27). 

Efficiency 

One of the most important factors, mentioned by both authors, seems to be efficiency. 

This  means  to  present  the  grammar  item  so  that  the  students  get  to  using  it  on  their  own 

as soon  as  possible.  As  Thornbury  puts  it:  “prolonged  attention  to  grammar  is  difficult  to 

justify”  (1999,  25).  We  should  not  try  to  cover  a  whole  page  in  a  grammar  book  with 

explanations, as the exercises and activities are more important for effective learning.  

Clarity 

“A  good  presentation  should  be  clear,”  says  Harmer  (1987,  18),  and  adds  that 

“students should have no difficulty in understanding the situation or what the new language 

means” (ibid.). This is a very important factor – according to Thornbury, presentation without 

understanding “is probably a waste of time” (1999, 26). 

Attention and motivation 

The  item  needs  to  be  presented  in  a  way  that  the  students  do  not  find  it  difficult  to 

concentrate on it and feel motivated to learn it. “Tasks and materials that are involving, that 

are  relevant  to  their  needs,  that  have  an  achievable  outcome,  and  that  have  an  element  of 

challenge while providing the necessary support, are more likely to be motivating than those 

that do not have these qualities.” (ibid.) In a grammar workbook, this is truer than in a face-to-

face  presentation  as  written  presentations  tend  to  be  tedious  to  read.  Any  grammar  book 

author should consider choosing some techniques and aids to make their presentation as lively 

as possible (e.g. dialogues, pictures, time lines, highlighting, or some discovery techniques). 

Appropriacy 

Finally,  the  presentation  needs  to  be  appropriate  for  the  grammar  point  explained 

and for the target group. The present thesis aims on adult learners at beginner and elementary 

levels of English (more on the target group is in Chapter 1.5) and the grammar points covered 

at the respective levels are listed in the practical part of the present thesis (in Chapter 2.1). 

 

11 

 

1.3.2 Deductive and inductive approach 

This subchapter tries to investigate an issue that seems to have been important since 

the  Grammar-Translation  Method  (see  Chapter  1.2):  How  to  teach  grammar  –  deductively, 

or inductively? 

‘Deductive’ way of grammar presentation is comfortable for the teacher and “helpful 

to  older  or  more  analytically-minded  learners”  (Ur  2000,  83).  The  other  way  to  present 

grammar is usually called ‘inductive’. It means that the students are given example sentences 

and  are  expected  to  derive  the  rules  themselves.  Ur  points  out  that  what  students  “discover 

themselves  they  are  more  likely  to  remember”,  but  warns  that  with  students  who  find  such 

discovering difficult, it might  mean wasting time “on sterile and frustrating guessing, or on 

misleading suggestions” (ibid.). Moreover, as Thornbury puts it, inductive approach demands 

that the teachers “select and organize the data carefully so as to guide learners to an accurate 

formulation of the rule, while also ensuring the data is intelligible” (1999, 55).  

However, he offers an example of such a well guided discovery (ibid., 53), which he 

took from a course book called New Wave 1. In the example, the basic rule for present simple 

is introduced. All the verbs in the example sentences are highlighted; the students are given 

a list  of  pronouns,  and  are  told  that  the  verbs  take  final  -s  only  with  certain  subjects.  Their 

task then is to tick the pronouns that represent the correct subjects. This kind of discovery is 

not very difficult, and shows a way how to use inductive approach even with students who 

find  English  difficult.  One  reason  to  use  inductive  approach  is  connected  with  some  of  the 

characteristics  of  students  with  learning  difficulties  (see  Chapter  1.5.2).  All  in  all,  both 

approaches  have  their  advantages  and  disadvantages,  and  if  done  with  the  respective  target 

group in mind, they can work for the students. 

Harmer admonishes teachers to “use a variety of techniques” (1991, 23). “Sometimes 

this  involves  teaching  grammar  rules;  sometimes  it  means  allowing  students  to  discover 

the rules for themselves.” (ibid.) The variety also helps liven up the learning process. Whether 

it is a deductively or inductively taught unit, I believe it is a good idea to let the students write 

and think also during the presentation part of it.  

12 

 

1.4 How to practise grammar 

Practice is usually more important for the learners than the presentation. As Thornbury 

points out, “simply knowing what to do is no guarantee that you will be able to do it, or that 

you will be able to do it well” (1999, 91), but this is exactly what the learner needs to know: 

Am  I  able  to  use  the  item  I  am  supposed    to  know?  As  a  result,  Scrivener  observed  that 

“language  practice  activities  are  arguably  the  most  important  part  of  any  grammar  lesson” 

(2005, 255). 

The  present  chapter  is  devoted  to  ways  in  which  to  practise  grammar.  It  focuses  on 

those kinds of exercises and activities that are applicable in self-study materials. This means 

that most of the exercise will need to be accompanied with a key. Although this need often 

cannot  be  met  in  freer  activities  and  oral  practice,  the  present  thesis  does  not  omit  them 

as they are very useful for learners. They move learners from just thinking about the language 

to using it.  

There  are  basically  two  types  of  grammar  practice.  Exercises  and  activities  that  pay 

a lot  of  attention  to  form  and  teach  the  learners  to  use  correct  structures  try  to  achieve 

accuracy, whereas exercises and activities that pay attention to meaning and teach the learners 

to use the language easily and without hesitation intend to teach fluency (Thornbury 1999, 92-

93). These two types form a range with awareness raising activities being the most controlled, 

form-oriented  practice  and  with  free  discourse  being  the  least  controlled,  meaning-oriented 

practice (Ur 1996, 84).  

The  following  chapter  tries  to  briefly  summarize  the  individual  stages  of  this  range 

together with the most common written practice exercises. It starts with the most controlled 

exercises and ends in freer exercises. This order reflects the order of exercise types usually 

used in the lessons. However, this order does not need to be strictly followed. Sometimes it is 

good to make the learners pay attention to the form after they have worked with the grammar 

point in different ways. 

13 

 

1.4.1 Types of exercises 

Awareness raising 

Awareness  raising  exercises  are  exercises  that  focus  learner’s  attention  on  “form 

and/or meaning” (Ur 1996, 84). Thanks to exercises of this type, “there is no immediate need 

to produce the item” (Thornbury 1999, 105), and the student’s attention is not distracted away 

“from the brain work involved in understanding and restructuring” (ibid.). 

These characteristics can be attributed to exercises in which the student has a text and 

only underlines instances of a given grammatical item (Ur 1996, 84), exercises with answers 

“already written in, some right some wrong” for the students to correct them (ibid.), exercises 

with  several  alternatives  to  choose  from  (Thornbury  1999,  107  and  Scrivener  2005,  261), 

exercises  with  matching  answers  to the  questions  (Scrivener  2005,  261), and  other  types  of 

matching (sentence to a response, pictures to sentences, parts of sentences, etc.). 

Most  of  the  awareness-raising  exercises  are  easier  than  other  exercises  in  that  the 

students need to think just about grammar rules and nothing else. They also help the student 

quickly  find  out  whether  they  understood  the  explanations  well.  Hence,  these  exercises  are 

a good option for the first exercise of the practice section in any grammar unit. 

Controlled practice 

Learners  manipulate  the  language  following  the  rules  they  have  learnt.  They 

sometimes  do  not  even  need  to  understand  the  content.  The  most  often  used  controlled 

practice  exercises  are  fill-ins,  drills,  word  order,  and  sometimes  even  translations.  These 

exercises  can  be  made  more  interesting  “by  the  introduction  of  piquant  or  amusing  subject 

matter, or some game-like techniques” (Ur 1988, 9). The controlled practice can become more 

meaningful by letting the learners use some words of their own choice (Ur 1996, 84). This is 

usually done through personalization. 

Fill-in the gap is a type of exercise with blanks instead of some words. Students are 

usually  given  a  choice  of  words  to  fill  in.  Harmer  claims  that  “the  fill-in  is  a  favourite 

technique  for  practising  and  testing  writing”  (1947,  52).  These  exercises  already  demand 

writing.  However,  students  write  just  one  or  two  words  per  sentence,  which  makes  the 

exercises  rather  fast,  time-saving,  sometimes  almost  drill-like  practice.  As  Harmer  puts  it:  

“Fill-ins are fairly easy to write and are useful for quick practice of specific language points.” 

(ibid.) 

In written drill exercises, “students show that they can make correct sentences with the 

new  item”  (Harmer  1947,  41).  These  sentences  are  “predetermined  by  the  teacher 

14 

 

or textbook” (Ur 1996, 84). A model sentence is usually followed by cues which the learner 

has  to  use  in  his  or  her  sentences,  following  the  pattern  of  the  model.  These  are  called 

substitution  drills  (term  used  by  Scrivener  2005,  257).  Scrivener  also  offers  several  more 

kinds  of  drill,  some  of  them  being  suitable  also  for  written  practice:  transformation  drills 

(students  need  to  use  their  own  words  to  express  information  given  by  the  textbook  using 

the grammatical item), true sentences (students answer questions with sentences that are true 

for  them;  again  they  are  told  what  grammatical  item  or  items  to  use),  transformation  into 

a different grammatical structure (e.g. change into questions, or change into the past perfect), 

and substitution drills with pictures. (ibid., 258-9) 

Both  fill-ins  and  written  drills  are  very  much  controlled  and  “not  very  creative” 

(Harmer 1947, 41) types of exercises. Written drills mean a lot of writing but, as a result, they 

help the learner to become aware of the structure of the sentence. If they are too easy, they 

can become boring and dull. “It is the difficulty and the sense of achievement that make drills 

worth doing.” (Scrivener 2005, 256) On the other hand, it may be vital to insert practice that 

is ‘too easy’, just to raise the confidence of the beginner learner. However, this should not be 

done too often, rather just from time to time, and preferably with those grammatical items that 

many a learner struggles with. 

Word order exercises have jumbled sentences with words and phrases to put in their 

original position. These exercises are very much controlled, as all the words are given. Yet 

they are very useful because they practise something that “is a problem for most non native 

speakers of English” (Harmer 1947, 53), moreover, “this is especially so in writing” (ibid.). 

These  are  very  straightforward  exercises  and  do  not  leave  many  choices  to  their  author. 

The only  choices  are  where  to  put  the  full  stop  (at  the  end  of  the  line  or  at  the  end  of  the 

sentence)  and  which  parts  of  the  sentence  to  mix  as  individual  words  and  which  to  leave 

rather as whole phrases (e.g. plays / Dominic / every Saturday morning / the piano).  

Guided (meaningful) practice 

The  output  language  is  not  much  controlled.  “Learners  form  sentences  of  their  own 

according to a set pattern, but exactly what vocabulary they use is up to them.” (Ur 1996, 84)  

An example of this type of exercise might be parallel writing. It is an exercise where 

a text  of  certain  type  (postcard,  e-mail,  brochure,  etc.)  serves  as  a  model  and  students  are 

asked to write something similar (Harmer 1947, 54). This type of exercise expects a teacher to 

read  the  text  afterwards  and  correct  it.  Therefore,  it  is  not  very  suitable  for  a  self-study 

grammar workbook. However, as the workbook only supplements a general English course, it 

should be possible for the learners to hand in the writing to their general English teacher. 

15 

 

Free sentence composition 

In  free  sentence  composition,  learners  get  a  situation,  a picture,  a  questionnaire 

or some other cue and try to write sentences about it (Harmer 1947, 54 and Scrivener 2005, 

265). Another kind of sentence composition expects the learners to deliver correct questions 

to given answers. The composition is usually structure-based, which means that the students 

are  directed  to  use  a  particular  structure.  The  present  thesis  includes  both  written  and  oral 

tasks of this type. Suggested answers can be found in the key.  

Discourse composition and free discourse 

In free discourse exercises and activities, “learners hold a discussion or write a passage 

according to a given a task” (Ur 1996, 84). The type of grammar practice where the students 

are  directed  to  include  certain  structures  in  their  discourse  is  called  discourse  composition 

(term  used  by  Ur,  ibid.).  Several  exercises  and  activities  of  these  types  are  included  in  the 

workbook that is a part of the present thesis. There is no key to them. 

Growing  stories  are  activities  in  which  the  first  sentence  of  a  story  is  given  and  the 

students  are  asked  to  continue  either  completely  on  their  own,  or  with  the  aid  of  pictures 

and/or selection of words to use (Scrivener 2005, 265). They represent a meaningful and vital 

part  of  grammar  learning.  Stories,  as  it  was  with  parallel  writing,  expect  a  teacher  to  read 

them afterwards and correct them.  

16 

 

1.5 The characteristics and needs of the target group 

As  already  mentioned  in  the  Introduction  and  alluded  to  throughout  the  previous 

chapters, the present thesis will include a grammar workbook, or at least a few representative 

parts  of  it.  The  grammar  workbook  is  created  for  those  who  need  to  understand  grammar, 

because, for some reason, they fail to acquire the rules they are expected to or want to use in 

their general English course or a self-study process.  

The target group chosen for this thesis is adult learners who are beginners, or have just 

reached  an  elementary  level  of  English.  An  author  might  like  to  take  people  with  special 

needs  into  account  when  creating  materials  such  as  the  intended  grammar  workbook.  This 

chapter will therefore look into the needs of adult learners, and into the special educational 

needs of students with SLD. 

The  present  thesis  attempts  to  meet  the  needs  of  as  many  adult  learners  as  possible, 

including adults with specific learning disabilities (SLD). 

17 

 

1.5.1 Adult learners 

Adults  learn  in  ways  different  from  children.  Young  children  are  immersed 

in the language,  their  mothers  talk  to  them  every  day  in  much  the  same  way,  and  children 

naturally  pick  up  the language.  Till  about  7  years  old,  they  are  able to  absorb the  language 

without  even  being  aware  that  they  are  learning  something.  They  learn  words,  structures, 

pronunciation,  intonation,  usage,  all  at  once.  Yet,  as  Swan  argued  at  a  conference  in 

Harrogate,  “you  can’t  get  the  natural  conditions  of  language  acquisition  (full-time  exposure 

at an  early  age)  in  the  language  classroom.  Our  job  as  teachers  is  to  compensate  for 

the absence of these conditions, not to try insanely to recreate them” (Oxford Teachers’ Club 

2006). As Thornbury puts it, children “are better at picking up language implicitly, rather than 

learning  it  as  a  system  of  explicit  rules.  Adult  learners,  on  the  other  hand,  may  do  better 

at activities which involve analysis and memorisation” (1999, 27). This characteristic of adult 

learners represents an important reason for teaching grammar. 

Lieb (1991) describes several other characteristics of adult learners. Here are two of 

them – those that may influence creation of a grammar book. 

Seeing reason and purpose 

The author claims that teachers “must show participants how the class will help them 

reach their goals (e.g., via a personal goals sheet)”, and later in the article he points out that 

“adults  are  relevancy-oriented”,  which  means  that  they  “must  see  a  reason  for  learning 

something” (ibid.).  

These needs can be satisfied in several ways. The grammar book can provide a well-

structured preface, in which all the advantages of the book would be mentioned. It would be 

vital for the most crucial advantages to appear at the back of the cover, too.  

Another way to make learners aware of the usefulness of the workbook as a means of 

achieving  their  goals  is  to  include  a  portfolio.  The  citation  above  suggests  personal  goals 

sheet. In a book, the sheet, or portfolio, can hardly be personal, as the book is not aimed at 

just  one  particular  person.  Rather,  the  book  is  to  be  used  by  as  many  learners  as  possible. 

The solution to this can be to anticipate the goals of learners and create a portfolio that reflects 

the most common goals, or to create more than one portfolio (e.g. one for learners whose goal 

is to speak fluently, next for learners whose goal is to read books and articles in English, and 

another one for learners who need English for writing). 

It cannot be doubted that the most important way to make learners see the reason in 

using the grammar book is to make sure that the content itself is relevant to what the learners 

18 

 

need. In the short term, they probably need to understand and practise the grammatical items 

covered in the coursebooks they are using. In the present thesis, this need will be met by using 

several general English coursebooks and workbooks to 

1) find out what points are usually covered in the books (this is done in Chapter 2.1) 

2) include the same or similar kinds of exercises and sentence structures 

3) use the vocabulary (and maybe even the names) used in the books. 

In  the  long  term  view,  learners  usually  need  to  make  themselves  understood 

in English.  This  need  can  be  met  by  consulting  conversational  handbooks  or  Everyday 

English sections in the coursebooks, and including examples from a real life communication 

the  grammar  book.  Another  way  to  reach  the  goal  is  to  make  the  learners  speak  (see 

Chapter 1.4). 

Using life experiences and knowledge 

Leib  claims  that  “adults  have  accumulated  a  foundation  of  life  experiences  and 

knowledge  that  may  include  work-related  activities,  family  responsibilities,  and  previous 

education”  (1991),  and  that  “they  need  to  connect  learning  to  this  knowledge/experience 

base” (ibid.). Book writers cannot much rely on readers’ knowledge because they can never 

know who will read their book. However, they can offer space for learners where it will be 

possible  to  use  their  experiences.  In  a  grammar  exercise  book,  this  may  be  done  through 

exercises where the learner completes sentences in such a way that the result is true for him 

or her (e.g. My ________ didn’t eat _________ but now _________ ________ ___________ 

can result into My son didn’t eat apples, but now he eats them, or My mother didn’t eat cheese 

but now she eats it, or anything else), or through any other personalized activities. 

19 

 

1.5.2 Students with SLD 

“Most people do not outgrow learning disabilities” (Gerber and Reiff In ERIC Digest 

1998), although they usually stop having problems.  Some  of them because they finish their 

studies and no longer learn anything. Others because they adopted certain strategies that help 

them  deal  with  the  difficulty.  However,  when  adults  start  learning  a  foreign  language,  the 

difficulties  might  re-emerge.  Dinklage,  who  was  trying  to  find  out  why  some  of  the  best 

Harvard  University  students  have  problems  in  their  language  classes,  pointed  out  that  even 

students not previously diagnosed as having learning difficulties showed up as having them in 

the foreign language classroom (Schwarz 1997). The arguments in the present paragraph have 

shown that even adults can have SLD and it is worth taking this into account when teaching 

foreign languages. The question is how. 

Ideas  relevant  to  the  creation  of  a  grammar  book  will  be  listed  below.  However,  it 

should be borne in mind that “as with any aspect of learning for any learning disabled student, 

no single solution is good for everybody” (ibid.). 

Multisensory approach and learning strategies 

Leib  claims  that  teachers  should  not  forget  that  “in  some  people,  one  sense  is  used 

more than others to learn or recall information”, and should try to stimulate “as many senses 

as  possible”  (1991).  Multisensory  approach  is  frequently  mentioned  in  connection  with 

learning difficulties. For example, in her article on teaching adults with SLD Lowry proposes 

to  “use  multisensory  techniques  when  teaching  groups”  and  to  “use  color  coding  whenever 

possible” (1990). Schwarz (1997) names three areas of multisensory stimulation: visual (using 

eyes),  tactile  (using  touch),  and  kinaesthetic  (using  movement).  He  does  not  mention  aural 

stimulation, which seems to be very important to the authors of Anglický nápadníček (Ideas 

for English). They claim that the more a dyslexic student listens to the spoken language whilst 

watching the text, the faster he or she learns the language (Hurtová et al. 2006, 5). They also 

add  to  the  idea  of  colour  coding.  It  is  explained  as  a  tool  to  help  dyslexic  people  orientate 

themselves in a text, and, numbering the lines, or covering the text with a transparent colour 

plastic film are two more tools helping the same purpose (ibid.).  

All these suggestions should be mentioned in the preface to any book that tries to meet 

the needs of people with SLD. Moreover, texts can be numbered by lines, and all exercises 

should  be  numbered.  Clear  layout  of  the  pages  seems  essential.  This  can  be  supported  by 

using  colours  where  feasible.  In  addition,  a  really  good  book  for  language  learners,  even 

20 

 

a grammar  book,  should  have  a  CD  with  things  to  listen  to  (either  audio  CD,  or  computer 

CD/DVD with a lot of listening) enclosed.  

The  multisensory  approach  reflects  on  the  fact  that  each  person  learns  in  a  different 

way. By helping students to use the ways that fit them, we help them to learn effectively. This 

idea is connected with the theory of learning styles. According to Wikipedia, “Learning Style 

Theory proposes that different people learn in different ways and that it is good to know what 

your  own  preferred  learning  style  is”  (Wikipedia  In  Skalová  2007,  19).  As  Gadbow 

and DuBois  put 

it,  “using  activities 

that  represent  a  variety  of 

learning  styles” 

is one of techniques  that  help  students  to  cope  with  a  learning  disability  (In  Kerka  1998). 

“The  basic  learning  styles  are  the  visual  learning  style,  the  auditory  learning  style, 

and the tactile/kinesthetic  learning  style”  (Skalová  2007,  19).  The  classification  is  the  same 

as in multisensory approach. Therefore, it would be vital for the preface with suggestions on 

foreign  language  learning  to  be  based  on  both  the  practical  implications  of  multisensory 

approach and the practical implications of the Learning Style Theory. Questionnaires can be 

inserted to help the students find out what kind of learner they are may also be included. 

Concrete and abstract 

It is vital to “teach new concepts concretely because it is often easier for LD students 

to learn the theory after learning its practical applications”, to “make abstract concepts more 

concrete by ... relating new information to everyday life”, and to “make directions specific, 

concrete, and understandable” (Lowry 1990). It is easier to understand abstract rules if it is 

possible  to  see  a  model  of  how  it  works  first.  This  piece  of  information  supports  the  idea 

of inductive grammar teaching (see Chapter 1.3.2).  

To relate the rules to everyday life there can be comic pictures and pieces of real life 

communication  in  the  workbook.  The  clarity  and  comprehensibility  of  directions  can  be 

helped by use of examples. 

Vocabulary 

Schwarz  proposes  to  reduce  the  vocabulary  demand  (1997)  and  Kerka  suggests 

minimizing  distractions  (1998),  which,  in  the  case  of  a  grammar  book,  may  refer  to 

the vocabulary  demand,  too.  However,  the  higher  amount  of  words  the  students  know,  the 

better  they  can  communicate  their  ideas.  For  these  reasons,  in  some  exercises  only  words 

from beginner and elementary materials are used, whereas in other exercises rich vocabulary 

is used.  

21 

 

Grammar rules 

An  effective  strategy  to  cope  with  grammar  rules  is  to  prepare  a  list  of  example 

sentences, one sentence for each rule (Hurtová et al. 2006, 5). The purpose of these sentences 

is  to  learn  them  by  heart  so  that  they  help  the  learner  create  his  or  her  own  sentences. 

Recorded on a tape or CD, they are a perfect way of using the multisensory approach (ibid.). 

A list like this could be prepared by the author of the grammar book and put at the beginning 

or the end of the book. In such case, recording the sentences onto the CD goes without saying. 

Another  possibility  is  to  tell  students  about  this  strategy  in  the  preface  with  suggestions  on 

learning languages, and advise them to make the list on their own. In the latter case, the rules 

are  made  personal,  especially  if  they  are  accompanied  by  miniature  drawings  made  by 

the student himself or herself. 

Reviews 

A  very  important  characteristic  of  a  grammar  book  is  the  way  it  reviews  the  points 

covered  in  the  previous  chapters.  “Providing  constant  review”  is,  as  Schwarz  claims, 

a principle  “known  to  be  effective  for  LD  students”  (1997).  When  a  book  wants  to  meet 

the needs of students with SLD, it is vital to include more revision pages than usual. I propose 

including  sections that  review  just  one  particular  point,  sections that  include  several  related 

points  (e.g.  present  simple  together  with  present  continuous  before  teaching  to  distinguish 

them),  and  sections  that  include  a  mixture  of  relatively  unrelated  points  (they  would  have 

in common just the fact that they were dealt with in the several preceding chapters). 

22 

 

2 Practical part 

So far, the present thesis has offered theoretical starting points, often with more than 

one  suggestion  or  solution.  Every  grammar-book  author  needs  to  make  his  or  her  own 

decision about a particular issue. Chapter 2.2 is a summary of my own choices; a few selected 

example  units  of  a  grammar  workbook  for  adult  beginners  can  be  found  in  the  subsequent 

chapters.  However,  first  of  all  we  need  to  find  an  answer  to  the  following  question:  Which 

grammar points should the grammar book cover? 

 

2.1 Grammar for beginners 

This  chapter  investigates  which  grammar  items  are  usually  taught  at the  early levels 

of English  (beginner  and  elementary).  Before  doing  so,  it  is  worth  mentioning  that  what 

makes  a grammar  book  suitable  for  beginners  is  not  only  the  choice  of  grammar  items,  but 

also  the  way  it  is  segmented  into  small  bits  of  knowledge  (e.g.  the  forms  of  to  be  are  not 

introduced  all  at  once  in  all  types  of  sentences,  but  segmented  into:  positive,  negative, 

and question,  each  practised  on  its  own  and  then  practised  together),  and  the  way  it  is 

explained and practised. The exercises should always be ordered from the easiest to the most 

difficult ones. 

Harmer  wrote:  “Luckily  there  is  consensus  about  what  grammar  should  be  taught 

at what level. ... While there may be variations in the actual order of grammatical items taught 

...  a  glance  through  the  majority  of  currently  available  teaching  materials  will  show  how 

strong  the  consensus  is.”  (1991,  23)  My  own  findings,  as  will  be  shown  below,  confirms 

Harmer’s conclusions. 

Which grammar points are taught at the early levels of English then? To answer this 

question, several student’s books and workbooks have been consulted, namely New Headway 

Beginner:  Workbook  with  key  by  Falla,  Soars  and  Soars  (2002),  Reward  Starter:  Practice 

Book  by  Pye  and  Greenall  (1997),  Lifelines  Elementary:  Workbook  by  Hutchinson  (1999), 

and  Angličtina  pro  samouky  (Self-study  Book  of  English)  by  Kollmannová  (1997).  These 

were  chosen  with  consideration  of  what  materials  adult  beginner  learners  most  often  use. 

The following  list  orders  the  first  thirty  grammar  items,  given  in  the  order  in  which  they 

usually appear. 

•  a/an 
• 

to be – am/is/are – singular 

23 

 

to be – am/is/are – plural 

this/that/these/those 

to have got 

the imperative (both affirmative and negative) 

•  nouns – forming plural 
•  a/an/- 
•  pronouns and possessive adjectives – singular 
• 
•  pronouns and possessive adjectives - plural 
•  possessive ’s 
• 
•  prepositions of place – in/on/under 
• 
• 
•  prepositions of place and movement – in/to 
•  prepositions of time – in/at 
•  present simple – negative (don’t) 
•  present simple – question (do) 
•  present simple – affirmative  (all persons) 
•  adverbs of frequency 
•  present simple – question and negative  (all persons) 
•  present simple – wh-question 
• 
•  modal verbs – can (some books also teach would, must, have to or may) 
•  past simple (was/were) 
•  past simple (regular verbs) 
•  past simple (irregular verbs) 
•  present continuous 
•  present continuous – negative and question 
• 
•  adjectives – superlatives and comparatives 
• 

future (present continuous) 

there is / there are 

future (will or going to) 

The grammatical items taught in the chosen materials are almost the same, and their 

order differs only slightly (except New Headway Beginner which teaches have got much later 

than  all  of  the  other  materials).  Should  the  order  be  completely  the  same  in  all  of  the 

materials, it might be useful to follow it while creating the grammar workbook. Under these 

24 

 

circumstances, the author need not feel committed to follow any given order but may choose 

to  order  the  grammar  items  as  they  wish,  preferably  in  a  way  that  the  user  of  the  grammar 

workbook easily finds what he or she needs to practise.  

Furthermore,  the  organization  can  be  made  clearer  by  changes  of  the  names 

of individual chapters. One of the ways to accomplish this is to use numbers instead of some 

lengthy descriptions (the topic then might be specified in brackets after the title), for example 

Present  simple  2  (don’t)  instead  of  Present  simple  –  negative  (don’t).  Another  option 

grammar  books  use  sometimes,  is  to  title  the  chapter  with  an  example  of  the  grammatical 

structure going first, for example I don’t... (present simple negative). 

25 

 

2.2 The organization of the grammar workbook 

The workbook is to serve as an additional material to any general English course. It is 

written  in  such  a  way  that  the  learners  can  work  with  it  at  home.  Its  aims  are  to  introduce 

grammar items step by step, practise them in many different exercises (accuracy to fluency, 

both  traditional  and  game-like),  and  to  make  the  learners  feel  that  they  are  able  to 

communicate their ideas and that the English grammar is not overwhelming. 

 

2.2.1 Decisions regarding the whole workbook 

Materials 

The  same  beginner  and  elementary  materials  are  going  to  be  used  as  were  used  in 

Chapter 2.1, and several other materials, too. The majority are going to be materials for adults 

with only several books for children or teenagers. 

Names of units 

The individual grammatical items will be called with their grammatical name, or with 

a name used in the sources. In case of grammatical name, example of the structure will follow 

in brackets, so that even those who do not remember the grammatical names will be able to 

find what they need. Moreover, it will give the abstract concept a concrete form. 

Czech vs. English 

Except the portfolio, L1 will not be used at all. Grammar book authors can afford to 

use  English  only,  as  their  book  just  accompanies  general  English  courses.  In  those  courses 

then, the teacher can explain things the students did not understand when using the grammar 

book.  Moreover,  the  students  should  learn  to  use  a  dictionary  and  enlarge  their  vocabulary 

consequently.  To  make  things  easier  for  self-study  learners  using  materials  written  in  L1, 

a list of the most common instructions can be included at the front or at the back of a full-

length grammar book.  

Vocabulary 

Preferably, the same words will be used in the majority of exercises of the grammar 

workbook as in the elementary sources. However, these do not need to be only the words used 

in the respective units of the sources, but also words of some of the higher units. In exercises 

where students work with above their level materials (e.g. BBC news), the vocabulary of the 

source will be left without changes. The aim of such materials is not only to practise English 

grammar,  but  also  to  expose  the  students  to  authentic  materials.  Students  do  not  need  to 

26 

 

understand  all  the  words,  but  they  have  a  unique  chance  to  relate  their  knowledge 

to something real. 

Grammar presentation 

The usual practice of one page for explanations and one page for exercises will not be 

followed. Reading a whole page of theory might be tedious. I believe it is a good idea to let 

the user write and think already during the presentation stage. Therefore, in the present thesis 

the presentation and the practice will merge a little. A clear and airy layout seems vital. 

Grammar practice 

All exercises will be numbered or marked with letters to help SLD students orientate 

in the text. In a full-length grammar book, the interest and orientation can be heightened by 

the  use  of  colours.  In  the  present  workbooks  various  writing  styles  are  used  in  their  stead. 

Bold type is used to visually separate the instructions from the exercises. 

A  revision  unit  should  follow  after  every  several  units,  consolidating  the  new 

grammatical items. Here and there, a revision exercise consolidating one grammar item might 

be inserted into a unit that practises a different item. 

Pictures 

A  grammar  book  consisting  of  text  only  might  look  boring.  To  make  it  more 

interesting,  pictures  or  comic  pictures  can  be  added.  Each  unit  of  the  present  thesis  is, 

therefore, enlivened by a picture. Most of these pictures are accompanied by an example of 

a structure  taught  in  that  particular  unit,  so  that  the  eyes  of  the  reader  are  attracted  to  it 

and the explanations  are  then  easier  for  him  or  her  to  internalize.  I  must  apologize  here  for 

the quality of some of the pictures used. Their quality is far from professional due to the fact 

that they are drawn in my own hand.  

Key 

A  key  is  an  indispensable  part  of  any  practice  book  that  is  intended  for  self-study. 

Most  of  the  exercises  are  accompanied  with  a  straightforward  key,  freer  exercises  are 

accompanied just with suggested answers, and some free exercises are left completely without 

key  as  checking  free  discourse  with  a  key  might  make  the  learners  pay  attention  more 

to the form than to the content and so the practice might result in another accuracy exercise. 

The present key is written with regard to SLD students, who would easily get lost in a key 

written  in  lines,  should  they  work  in  columns  or  other  alternative  shapes  in  the  exercises. 

Thus the key needs to reflect (at least to some degree) the layout of the actual exercises.  

27 

 

Portfolio 

The present thesis contains just an example of a portfolio. It serves recoding progress 

and  success  of  learners  who  have  just  gone  through  the  first  units  of  the  workbook. 

The usefulness of the portfolio is explained to the learners at its beginning. It might be better 

to  insert  the  portfolio  after  a  revision  unit  than  to  have  all  the  portfolios  at  the  back  of  the 

book, where they could easily escape the learners’ notice.  

The form of the portfolio was inspired by  Upstream  Elementary (Evans and Dooley 

2005) and by Deníček: Soubor podpůrných materiálů k učebnici Chit Chat 1 (Little Journal: 

A Collection of Support Materials to Chit Chat 1) by Hartingerová, et al. (2005). The former 

source is all in English, the latter is in Czech. I assume that Czech is more appropriate for the 

target  group,  especially  when  they  are  talking  about  learning  grammar.  A  practical  feature 

of both  materials  is  that  they  give  the  learner  opportunities  to  remember  the  piece 

of knowledge in discussion by reading, writing or working with a practical example of it. 

2.2.2 Decisions regarding individual units 

Unit 1 

The  present  unit  deals  with  the  two  different  forms  of  the  indefinite  article. 

The presentation begins with a dialogue between a teacher and a student, where the student 

gets the article wrong. The users of the workbook learn why this was wrong in the following 

exercise.  The  rule  is  to  be  induced  from  examples  in  a  table.  The  teacher  can  advise  the 

students  to  circle  the  article  and  the  first  letter  in  the  pronunciation  with  the  same  colour. 

This can help the learners to make the rule even easier to recognize. The students do not need 

to formulate the rule on their own. They just complete sentences.  

Most of the exercises in this unit are awareness-raising and accuracy oriented. Some 

of them are traditional (exercises 4 and 8), some of them are more game-like (exercises 5-7). 

The last part of exercise No. 6 is a guided meaningful practice of the parallel-writing type (see 

Chapter  1.4).  The  exercise  was  inspired  by  Timesaver  Grammar  Activities  (Degnan-Veness 

2001,  58).  The  last  exercise  of  the  unit  uses  an  authentic  material,  namely  a  BBC  article 

on back pain. The article was chosen so that many examples of the target grammar are present 

and the topic is relevant to adult learners at the same time. 

Other sources used for writing this unit were New Headway Beginner: Workbook with 

key  by  Falla,  Soars  and  Soars  (2002),  New  Headway  Elementary:  Workbook  with  key  by 

Soars,  Soars  and  Wheeldon  (2006),  Lifelines  Elementary:  Workbook  by  Hutchinson  (1999), 

28 

 

Cutting  Edge:  Workbook  by  Moor  and  Cunningham  (2001),  and  Angličtina  pro  samouky 

(Self-study Book of English) by Kollmannová (1997). 

Unit 2 

The  second  Unit  focuses  on  forming  plurals  of  nouns.  A  deductive  approach  seems 

more appropriate for this item than an inductive one, as the many exceptions make the rule 

difficult  to  identify  and  formulate.  The  presentation  is  combined  with  practice  so  that 

the result  is  livelier.  The  practice  in  the  presentation  part  of  the  unit  consists  only 

of awareness raising exercises that are very easy and therefore do not need to be accompanied 

with a key.  

Exercise  No.  6  is  to serve  as a  revision  of  what  irregular  forms  students  know  from 

their  general  English  course.  The  pronunciation  of  the  words  is  supplied  as  students  often 

mispronounce  them.  Exercise  No.  7  is  an  accuracy-oriented  exercise,  which  –  besides 

grammar  –  also  practises  students’  knowledge  of  numbers.  The  following  exercise  is 

a difficult awareness raising exercise but on the other hand it is fun. Although the form of the 

exercise would be more appropriate for small children, I decided to use it because so far all 

the exercises of the unit have been traditional and I felt that it needs some refreshment. It also 

consolidates  the  usage  of  indefinite  articles  taught  in  Unit  1.  Exercise  No.  9  is  a  free 

composition  based  on  pictures.  Although  the  learners  are  not  expected  here  to  use  whole 

sentences,  the  example  indicates  that  the  learners  use  adjectives  to  describe  the  pictures. 

The instruction to the exercise tells the students to compose their answers both orally and in 

writing.  This  is to  help them  develop  also their speaking  skills.  The  answers  in the key  are 

only suggested answers, not the only correct solution. Exercise No. 10 is a two-in-one game. 

It  practises  singular  and  plural  forms  of  several  words.  The  eleventh  exercise  is  a  creative 

writing at the level of words. The card on the left is a guided meaningful practice, whereas 

the card  on  the  right  represents  a  freer  practice.  There  is  no  key  for  the  last  two  exercises. 

Some  of 

the  words  of  Unit  1  reappear 

in 

this  unit 

to  reinforce 

the  students’ 

knowledge of them. 

The major sources for writing this unit were Grammar Practice Activities: A practical 

guide  for  teachers  by  Ur  (1988),  Reward  Elementary:  Student’s  Book  by  Greenall  (1997), 

New  Headway  Elementary:  Student’s  Book  by  Soars  and  Soars  (2006),  New  Headway 

Elementary: Workbook with key by Soars, Soars and Wheeldon (2006), Lifelines Elementary: 

Workbook by Hutchinson (1999), and  Angličtina  pro  samouky (Self-study Book of English) 

by Kollmannová (1997). 

29 

 

Unit 3 

Affirmative  forms  of  the  verb  to  be  are  introduced  in  this  Unit,  both  singular 

and plural. The rules are introduced through a combination of guided discovery (in exercise 

No.1) and deductive approach (in exercise No.2).  

The discovery technique used in the first exercise is inspired by Hutchinson, who tries 

to  introduce  grammar  analytically  in  all  of  his  books,  for  example  in  New  Hotline  Starter 

(1998). The same sentences are used in the exercise as in the introductory picture. This helps 

the  learner  to  relate  the  picture  to  the  grammar  item  and  prevents  puzzlement  about  what 

sentences  to  read.  Some  puzzlement  might  arise  about  what  to  fill  in  into  the  table. 

The students are helped with this by the forms of the verb  to  be being written in bold print 

in the sentences. Moreover, a completed table is included in the key for students who need to 

be reassured that their solution is the right one. Short forms are treated separately in exercise 

No. 2. The exercise combines grammar presentation with awareness-raising grammar practice 

and  I  assume  students  will  find  this  very  easy,  almost  tedious.  Therefore,  a  key  to  this 

exercise is not included in the workbook. 

Exercise No.3 is a fill-in the gap exercise with a limited choice of forms. The students 

are  immediately  confronted  with  sentences  with  names  in  the  place  of  pronouns.  Exercise 

No.4  is  a  creative  awareness-raising  activity.  Students  write  their  own  sentences  using 

a choice of words from a table. A key is not included for this exercise. The following exercise 

is a typical fill-in the gap exercise but the forms to choose from are not indicated. Exercise 

No. 6 is traditional word order exercise. Exercises 7 and 8 are oral free discourse exercises. 

Learners  are  not  told  what  structures  to  use.  The  students  will  use  exactly  those  structures 

they feel confident about, and after they gain even more confidence, they will probably try to 

use more complicated structures. A similar idea is present in the following exercise. This is 

a free sentence composition based on four pictures. Here the students are given an opportunity 

to learn some more complicated structures when consulting the key with suggested answers. 

Exercise  No.  10  is  oral  practice  again,  but  this  time  it  is  more  game-like  and  an  example 

structure is shown. The last exercise is an awareness-raising game-like exercise. It looks easy, 

but it is not. The learners will need to re-think some of their choices to complete the exercise 

successfully. 

The  major  sources  used  for  writing  this  unit  were  Lifelines  Elementary:  Workbook 

(Hutchinson 1999), Reward Starter: Practice Book (Pye and Greenall 1997), New Headway 

Beginner:  Workbook  with  key  (Falla,  Soars  and  Soars  2002),  and  Angličtina  pro  samouky 

(Self-study Book of English) by Kollmannová (1997). 

30 

 

Unit 4 

The fourth unit of the present thesis is devoted to pronouns and possessive adjectives. 

The  presentation  of  this  topic  is  treated  in  a  very  similar  way  to  Unit  3.  This  means  that 

an inductive  approach  was  chosen  and  the  discovery  is  realized  with  the  aid  of  a  grammar 

chart. It consists of just one exercise accompanied with a key. The exercise might sound a bit 

stilted.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  all  pronouns  as  well  as  possessive  adjectives  need  to  be 

there. Moreover, I believe that it is student friendly when the explanations manage to relate 

to the picture used in the unit. 

The  rest  of the  unit  deals  with  practice.  Exercises  2-3  and 5-7  are  awareness-raising 

and accuracy-oriented; exercises 4 and 8-12 are freer.  

The  first  two  exercises  practise  limited  choice  of  forms.  The  next  exercise  is  a  free 

writing  activity  similar  to  growing  stories.  Students  are  given  first  two  sentences 

of a paragraph  about  an  imaginary  man.  They  are  told  to  use  four  chosen  words  in  their 

writing.  Exercise  No.  5  is  difficult  but  students  need  this  kind  of  practice  as  this  type 

of exercise  appears  in  many  of  the  consulted  materials.  The  following  exercise  was  taken 

from  Falla  and  Soars  (2002,  13)  and  adapted  to  practise  the  respective  grammar  item  more 

intensively than in the source. In the original version, students are to complete the text with 

many  different  words.  Here  the  blanks  are  spread  so  that  they  are  all  just  pronouns  and 

possessive adjectives. Exercise No. 7 is an imaginative activity by Kollmannová (1997, 5). It 

represents  a  list  of  people  who  attended  a  party.  It  was  slightly  modified,  so  that  it  is  not 

boring for students who learn English from Kollmannová’s textbook. 

Exercise  No.  8  is  a  free  sentence  composition  based  on  information  about 

an imaginary  person,  Sarah  Green.  Exercise  No.  9  is  a  personalized  version  of  the  same 

exercise.  The  following  two  exercises  are  meaningful  oral  activities.  The  first  of  them  is 

guided (examples of the language are shown) and the second one is completely free. There is 

no key for exercises 9-11. The last exercise is a free writing exercise taken from Ur (1988, 

165). The pictures are taken from Ur, too (ibid., 65). It is difficult, as the learners need to limit 

their  ideas  to  the  structures  they  know.  However,  they  might  know  more  than  has  been 

covered in the grammar workbook. Suggested answers can be found in the key. 

Besides Ur, the sources used for writing this unit were Reward Elementary: Student’s 

Book by Greenall (1997),  Reward  Starter:  Practice  Book by Pye and  Greenall (1997),  New 

Headway  Elementary:  Student’s  Book  by  Soars  and  Soars  (2006),  New  Headway  Beginner: 

Workbook with key by Falla, Soars and John Soars (2002), and Angličtina pro samouky (Self-

study Book of English) by Kollmannová (1997). 

31 

 

2.3 The grammar workbook 

2.3.1 Unit 1 – a/an 

1 Read the dialogue. 

Teacher: What is in the picture, Peter? 

Student: A book, a pencil, a car, a house, and  a ice-cream. 

Teacher: AN ice-cream! 

Student: An ice-cream? 

Teacher: Yes, an ice-cream. 

 

2 Look at the table and read the words. What is the rule?  

spelling
spelling    
spelling
spelling
anananan ice-cream 
aaaa   book 
anananan umbrella 
anananan apple 
aaaa   teacher 
aaaa   uniform 
a a a a   sandwich 

pronpronpronpronunciation
unciation    
unciation
unciation
[ˌaiaiaiaisˌkri:m] 
[bbbbˌk] 
[ˌˌˌˌmˌbrelˌ] 
[ˌææææpl] 
[ˌttttiˌˌˌ] 
[ˌjjjjuˌnˌfˌˌm] 
[ˌssssænwˌˌ] 

 

3 Write a/an to form the rule.  

__________ → We pronounce the following word with a vowel at the beginning.  

 

 

 

(ˌ, æ, e, ˌ, ˌ, ˌ, ai, ei,
ˌ, æ, e, ˌ, ˌ, ˌ, ai, ei, etc.) 
ˌ, æ, e, ˌ, ˌ, ˌ, ai, ei,
ˌ, æ, e, ˌ, ˌ, ˌ, ai, ei,

__________ → We pronounce the following word with a consonant at the beginning. 

 

 

 

(b, d, f, j, m, s, t, v, 
b, d, f, j, m, s, t, v, etc.) 
b, d, f, j, m, s, t, v, 
b, d, f, j, m, s, t, v, 

4 Use the rule to choose the correct alternative.  

1) This is __________________. 

2) He is ___________________. 

3) She is __________________. 

4) Jack is _________________. 

 

 

 

 

a) a pencil 

a) a actor 

 

 

b) an pencil 

b) an actor 

a) a good doctor 

b) an good doctor 

a) a old man 

 

b) an old man 

 

32 

 

 

5 Write the words onto the correct lines. (Pište slova na správné řádky.) 

actor [ˌæktˌ], man [mæn], woman [ˌwˌmˌn], address [ˌ’dres], American [ˌ’merˌkˌn]  

 

 

a 

an 

 

 

6 Complete the shopping lists with a/an. Then write your own shopping list. 

Wendy’s shopping list 

  Nick’s shopping list 

  Your shopping list 

_____ 

chocolate 

______ chicken burger 

_____________________ 

cake 

_____ apple juice 

_____ Madonna CD 

_____ pink T-shirt 

______ orange juice 

______ Offspring CD 

_____________  Arsenal 

school 

Football Club T-shirt 

_____ 

uniform 

 

7 Match the grey rectangles to the correct circle.  

_____________________ 

_____________________ 

_____________________ 

_____________________ 

_____________________ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

         A 

 

 

 

      AN 

 

 

good actor 

 

e-mail 

 

English lesson 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

architect 

 

 

old ink pen 

 

 

 

 

 

 

green apple 

 

 

 

sales manager 

 

 

 

ice-cream 

 

 

 

33 

 

8  Complete  the  BBC  news  on  back  pain  with  a/an.  All  you  need  to  know  is 

the pronunciation of the words after the blanks. 

 

Back pain 
Back pain is one of the most common ailments in the UK. 
 
It is thought more than 17 million Britons suffer from the problem, and the Health and 
Safety Executive estimates that it is responsible for nearly 5 million lost working days a 
year. 
 
How is the back made up? 
The major feature is the spine. This is ____ highly complex and delicate structure which is 
made up of 33 small bones called vertebrae. In between each vertebra is ____ disc which acts 
as ____ shock absorber, and stops the bones rubbing together. The discs are made up of ____ 
jelly like substance, which is protected by ____ tough, fibrous outer casing. The spine is 
supported by specialised back muscles, and ____ array of ligaments, nerves and tendons. 
 
Why is back pain on the increase? 
Experts believe that ____ major factor is the modern tendency to lead ____ sedentary 
lifestyle, both at work and home. Spending long stretches of time sitting in one position - 
often with the back not properly supported - is not good for the spine. The reliance on comfy 
soft furnishing may seem appealing - but often it encourages us to adopt ____ poor posture. 
Back pain is much less common in places such as India, where many more people are used to 
sitting on the floor, which is thought to allow the back muscles to find their own natural 
position. 
 
How can you minimise the risk? 
The spine is naturally curved into ____ S shape. The best way to keep it healthy is to try to 
maintain this shape as much as possible. This is particularly important when performing 
tasks, such as lifting, that carry ____ increased risk of injury. Strengthening the back 
muscles, keeping fit by taking regular exercise, and maintaining ____ healthy weight can all 
help to minimise the risk of back pain. It is also important to have ____ mattress that 
properly supports the body while you are asleep. If you do have ____ bad back probably the 
worst thing you can do is take to your bed. Experts believe that it is best to stay as active as 
you possibly can. 
 
Could there be another explanation for back pain? 
Some lumbar and lower spinal pain is caused by patients having one leg longer than the 
other. This puts the pelvis out of alignment causing pain, which without correction leads to 
long term compensatory problems such as back pain. In this case it might be wise to consult 
____ podiatrist who will measure the patient's limbs and if required provide either 
____orthoses - ____ orthopedic appliance used to support, align, prevent, or correct 
deformities - or arrange to modify the patients shoe to correct the difference.  
 
 

 

Source: http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/medical_notes/4722017.stm 

Note: The text was shorteneded to fit the page (several paragraphs were left out). 

34 

 

2.3.2 Unit 2 – plurals of nouns (car/cars) 

 

   

1 Add –s to form plurals.  

Example: a rose – roses  

a key – keys      a teacher – teachers 

(Notice there is no a/an with the plurals.) 

1) an actor – ______________ 

4) an apple – _________________ 

2) a bag – ________________ 

5) a pencil –  _________________ 

3) a book – _______________  

6) a message –  _______________ 

 

2 Try to say these sounds. Which are easier? 

-s [s] 

ss       ˌs       ˌs       kss 

-es [ˌz]  sˌz     ˌˌz       ˌˌz     ksˌz 

 

3 Add –es to form plurals. 

1) a watch – ________________ 

4) a box –  _________________ 

2) a glass –  ________________ 

5) a bus –  _________________ 

3) a wish –  ________________ 

6) a class – ________________ 

 

4 Write –s/ –es.  

a) two ice-cream____ 

c) four sandwich_____ 

e) six apple____ 

b) three book____ 

d) five e-mail_____ 

f) seven watch_____ 

 

5 Final –y (but not final –ay, -ey, -oy, -uy) changes into –ies.  

a baby – babies 

a dictionary – _______________ 

a family - _______________ 

a party – parties  

a country – _________________ 

a lady - _________________ 

35 

 

6 Write irregular plurals. Read the pronunciation. 

a man – ________  [mæn – men]  

a  woman  –  __________  [ˌwˌmˌn  – 

a  child  –  ________ 

[ˌaild  – 

ˌwˌmˌn]  

ˌˌˌldrˌn] 

a  person  –  ___________  [ˌpˌˌsˌn  – 

 

7 Write numbers and the plural forms. 

ˌpiˌpl ] 

a) a car (2) 

b) a game (6) 

c) a baby (3) 

d) a rose (10) 

e) a watch (4) 

two cars 
six games 
 
 
 

 

f) a pen (8) 

 
  g) a person (12) 
  h) an address (2) 
 

i) a friend (5) 

 

j) a day (7) 

 

 

 

 

 

8 Colour two correct alternatives in each line.  

six coutries 

an umbrella 

a countries 

a country 

three countrys 

an umbrellas 

two umbrellas 

six umbrellases 

two uniformes 

six uniforms 

a uniform 

an uniform 

one sandwiches 

one sandwich 

three sandwichs 

three sandwiches 

a e-mail 

six orangees 

two e-mails 

a orangees 

an e-mail 

an orange 

eight e-mailes 

five oranges 

 

9 What is in the pictures? Say and write. 

 

 

 

 

a ...a short pencil..... 

b ............................ 

c ............................ 

d ............................. 

 

 

 

 

 

e ............................. 

f ............................ 

g ............................ 

h ............................. 

 

36 

 

37 

 

10 Work with a partner or partners.   

a) Cut the cards from Appendix 1 and play dominoes. 

b) Cut the cards in halves and play pelmanism (find a pair / memory game). 

 

11 Look around you. What do you see? How many? Complete the lists. Use a dictionary. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

one ____________________ 
 

____________  ________________ 

two ____________________ 
 

____________  ________________ 

two ____________________ 
 

____________  ________________ 

three ___________________ 

____________  ________________ 

four ____________________ 

____________  ________________ 

five ____________________ 

____________  ________________ 

38 

 

2.3.3 Unit 3 – forms of to be (am/is/are) 

 

1 Read the sentences. Then complete the table.  

 

She is a woman. 

He is a man. 

They are happy. 

You are here now. 

We are old. 

I am a student. 

 

 

He 

She 

It 

You 

We 

They 

 

a woman. 

a man. 

a student. 

happy. 

here now. 

I 

............... 

............... 

............... 

old. 

2 We often use short forms in English. 

I’m from Britain. = I am from Britain. 

She’s from the Czech Republic. = She is from the Czech Republic. 

We’re from France. = We are from France. 

I’m Peter. = ..................................................................................... 

He’s a student. = ............................................................................. 

It’s a nice house. = .......................................................................... 

They’re Italian. = ............................................................................ 

  

3 Write am/are.  

a) I ______ happy. 

b) We _______ from Germany. 

c) Jack and Jill ______ from Britain. 

d) Jim and I ______ from the USA. 

39 

 

4  Use  the  table  to  write  sentences.  How  many  different  sentences can  you  write  in  just 

thirty seconds? Set a countdown and try.  

am 

’m 

is 

’s  

are 

’re  

I 

He 

She 

It 

You 

We 

They 

 

an actor. 

a manager. 

young. 

from Spain. 

Spanish. 

American. 

in Prague. 

here. 

You’re young.  ................................................. 

.......................................................................... 

.......................................................................... 

.......................................................................... 

.......................................................................... 

.......................................................................... 

.......................................................................... 

.......................................................................... 

.......................................................................... 

5 Write the correct form.  

a) Mary ________ happy. 

e) Mary and Sue ________ American. 

b) She _______ from the USA. 

f) They ________ doctors. 

c) John _______ in Paris. 

d) I _______ a waiter. 

 

6 Write the words in the correct order.  

g) You ________ an architect. 

h) Rachel ________ a teacher. 

a) an / actor / is / she  ................................................................................................. 

b) are / they / London / from ........................................................................................ 

c) am / the / from / Czech republic / I .......................................................................... 

d) Mary / Peter / Paris / are / in / and .......................................................................... 

e) student / Katrin / a / is ............................................................................................. 

f) friends / are / we 

............................................................................................... 

g) teacher / my / from / is / London ............................................................................ 

h) taxi / driver / John / a / is / ......................................................................................  

 

7 Look at Appendix 2. Colour cards 5-8. What is in the pictures? Try to describe the 

pictures in different ways. 

 

8 Make similar cards. What is in the pictures? 

You can draw for example: a tree or trees, a glass or glasses, a bed or beds. 

40 

 

9 What is in the pictures? Write sentences. 

 

a 

 b 

 

 c 

 

d 

 

a) ............................................................................................ 

b) ........................................................................................... 

c) ........................................................................................... 

d) ........................................................................................... 

 

10 Talk with a partner or partners. Look at cards 1-4 in Appendix 2. What is 

in the pictures? 

a) Use: sad, happy, small, big. 

b) Don´t show your card to your partner. Let him or her guess.  

 

 

It is a baby! 

No! 

c) Play with cards from exercise 7 and 8. 

 

11 Match. 

 

 

This is 

 

She is 

 

He is  

 

Tom and Gwyneth are  

 

These are 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

good books. 

 

a famous actor. 

 

an exercise. 

 

famous actors. 

 

an elegant woman. 

41 

 

2.3.4 Unit 4 – possessive adjectives (my, your, her ...) 

 

1 Read the sentences and complete the table.  

I am John. This is my mobile.  

It is new. Its colour is white. 

You are Kate. Your mobile is black. 

We are friends. Helen is our friend, too. 

 

She is a happy woman. Her husband is a 

happy man.  

They are happy. Their son is happy, too.  

He is 3. His name is Sam. 

 

2 Write she/her. 

 

Possessive 

adjectives 

my 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pronouns 

I 

you 

we 

they 

he 

she 

it 

Mandy  is  an  architect.  _____’s  26  and  ______’s  married.  _____  husband  is  thirty-two  and 

____ son is one. Mandy likes flowers. _____ favourite flowers are roses. 

 

3 Write his/her/they/their. 

Paul is an actor. He likes _____ job. ______ wife, María, is a shop assistant. She also likes 

_____ job. ______ are both 40. ______ are from Brazil. _______ daughter is in the USA now. 

 

4 Read about David. Continue. Use: wife, sons, clever, busy. 

David is an old man. He is 60 and he lives in Dublin with his family... 

42 

 

5 Choose the correct form.  

a) Their/They are from Italy. 

e) Where are you/your from? 

b) Her/She’s name’s Sally. 

c) His/He’s from the USA. 

f) What’s she/her name? 

g) Is you/your teacher good? 

d) His/He’s teacher is in Russia. 

h) Rachel is I/my teacher. 

 

6 Complete the conversations.  

 1  Andy 

Hello. ________ name’s Andy. 

 2  Tom 

Hello, Andy! How are ______? 

 

What’s _______ name? 

Andy 

Very well, thanks. And 

Suzi 

_______ name’s Suzi. 

 

______? 

Andy 

Where are _______ from, 

Tom 

________’m fine, thanks. 

 

Suzi? 

 

Who’s that girl over there? 

Suzi 

I’m from Hamburg, in 

Andy 

______’s my new friend. 

 

 

Germany. And ________? 

 

______ name’s Suzi. 

Where are _________ from? 

Tom 

Where’s ______ from? 

Andy 

_______’m from Boston. 

Andy 

______’s from Germany. 

 

7 Who was at the party? 

(cid:1) we and ______ three children 

(cid:1) we and ______ neighbours 

(cid:1) Miss Brown and ______ brother 

(cid:1) Paul and ______ wife 

(cid:1) Jane and ______ friend Sarah 

(cid:1) four students and ______ teacher 

(cid:1) Mr and Mrs Hill and ______ daughter 

(cid:1) a French woman with ______ husband 

(cid:1) Peter and ______ friend Andy 

(cid:1) you and _______ sister Kate  

 

8 Look at the table. Write sentences about Sarah. 

Name: Sarah Green 

........................................................................... 

Country: the USA 

........................................................................... 

Age: 29 

Job: nurse 

 

Family:  
father – 61, architect 
mother – 54, teacher 
brother – 27, actor 

........................................................................... 

........................................................................... 

........................................................................... 

............................................................................ 

............................................................................ 

 

43 

 

9 Fill in the table about you. Then write sentences. 

Name:  

Country:  

Age: 

Job:  

Family:  
 

 

.......................................................................................................... 

.......................................................................................................... 

.......................................................................................................... 

.......................................................................................................... 

.......................................................................................................... 

......................................................................................................... 

10  Talk  with  a  partner  or  partners.  Put  your  pens,  pencils,  books,  mobile  phones,  etc. 

on the table. 

This is my mobile phone. 

This is 
his bag. 

This is your book. 

 

 

 

11  Take  a  photograph  of  your  family.  Talk  about  them.  Say  as  much  information 

as possible.  

 

12 Compare the pictures. Write sentences. 

The girl in picture A is blonde, but ... 

 

 

 

 

44 

 

 2.4 Portfolio 

Toto  portfolio  slouží  k  zaznamenávání  Vašich  úspěchů  a  pokroků  při  zvládání 

jednotlivých  gramatických  jevů.  Také  Vám  pomůže  si  uvědomit,  jaké  strategie  při  učení 

používáte. 

 

Portfolio k lekcím 1-4 

 

1  Rozumím většině instrukcí ke cvičením. 

2  Když  nějaké  slovíčko  ze  zadání  neznám,  najdu  si  ho 

ve slovníčku. 

ANO  NE 

ANO  NE 

3  Vím, podle čeho se určuje, zda napíšeme „a” nebo „an”. 

ANO  NE 

Zakroužkujte správnou odpověď:      a ice-cream – an ice cream.  

 

4  Chápu, jak se v angličtině tvoří množné číslo. 

Sem si napište několik příkladů:   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ANO 

NE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5  Vím, kdy použijeme „am”, kdy „is” a kdy „are”. 

ANO 

NE 

Zakroužkujte správnou odpověď:      He am/is/are a boy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 I am/is/are clever. 

You am/is/are from Pakistan.  

 

 

 

6  Znám přivlastňovací zájmena (possesive adjectives). 

ANO 

NE 

Sem si napište několik příkladů:   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7  Umím mluvit o obrázcích použitých v lekcích 1-4. 

ANO 

NE 

 

 

 

 

 

8  Cvičení jsem vyplňoval(a) 

a) všechna cvičení lekce v jeden den. 

b) postupně – každý den několik cvičení. 

 

9  V budoucnu se chci ještě vrátit k těmto lekcím a cvičením:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

45 

 

2.5 Key to the grammar workbook 

 

Unit 1 – a/an 

 

Exercise 3 

AN → We pronounce the following word with a vowel at the beginning. 

A    → We pronounce the following word with a consonant at the beginning. 

 

Exercise 4  

 1a, 2b, 3a, 4b 

 

Exercise 5 

a – man, woman 

an – actor, address, American 

 

Exercise 6 

Wendy’s shopping list 

  Nick’s shopping list 

__a___ 

chocolate 

__a___ chicken burger 

__an__ orange juice 

__an___ Offspring CD 

__an_________  Arsenal 

Football Club T-shirt 

cake 

__an__ apple juice 

__a___ Madonna CD 

__a___ pink T-shirt 

school 

__a___ 

uniform 

 

Exercise 7 

a – green apple, good actor, sales manager 

an – English lesson, architect, ice-cream, e-mail, old ink pen 

 

46 

 

Exercise 8 

 

Back pain 
Back pain is one of the most common ailments in the UK. 
 
It is thought more than 17 million Britons suffer from the problem, and the Health and 
Safety Executive estimates that it is responsible for nearly 5 million lost working days a 
year. 
 
How is the back made up? 
The major feature is the spine. This is _a__ highly complex and delicate structure which is 
made up of 33 small bones called vertebrae. In between each vertebra is _a__ disc which acts 
as __a_ shock absorber, and stops the bones rubbing together. The discs are made up of _a__ 
jelly like substance, which is protected by _a__ tough, fibrous outer casing. The spine is 
supported by specialised back muscles, and _an__ array of ligaments, nerves and tendons. 
 
Why is back pain on the increase? 
Experts believe that _a__ major factor is the modern tendency to lead _a_ sedentary lifestyle, 
both at work and home. Spending long stretches of time sitting in one position - often with 
the back not properly supported - is not good for the spine. The reliance on comfy soft 
furnishing may seem appealing - but often it encourages us to adopt _a__ poor posture. Back 
pain is much less common in places such as India, where many more people are used to 
sitting on the floor, which is thought to allow the back muscles to find their own natural 
position. 
 
How can you minimise the risk? 
The spine is naturally curved into _an__ S shape. The best way to keep it healthy is to try to 
maintain this shape as much as possible. This is particularly important when performing 
tasks, such as lifting, that carry _an__ increased risk of injury. Strengthening the back 
muscles, keeping fit by taking regular exercise, and maintaining __a_ healthy weight can all 
help to minimise the risk of back pain. It is also important to have __a__ mattress that 
properly supports the body while you are asleep. If you do have __a__ bad back probably the 
worst thing you can do is take to your bed. Experts believe that it is best to stay as active as 
you possibly can. 
 
Could there be another explanation for back pain? 
Some lumbar and lower spinal pain is caused by patients having one leg longer than the 
other. This puts the pelvis out of alignment causing pain, which without correction leads to 
long term compensatory problems such as back pain. In this case it might be wise to consult 
__a_ podiatrist who will measure the patient's limbs and if required provide either 
_an_orthoses - _an_ orthopedic appliance used to support, align, prevent, or correct 
deformities - or arrange to modify the patients shoe to correct the difference.  
 
 

 

47 

 

Unit 2 – plurals of nouns (car/cars) 

 

Exercise 6 

a man – men 

a child – children 

 

Exercise 7 

a) two cars 

f) eight pens 

a woman – women 

a person – people 

b) six games 

g) twelve people 

c) three babies 

h) two addresses 

d) ten roses 

i) five friends  

e) four watches 

j) seven days 

 

Exercise 8 

six coutries 

an umbrella 

a countries 

a country 

three countrys 

an umbrellas 

two umbrellas 

six umbrellases 

two uniformes 

six uniforms 

a uniform 

an uniform 

one sandwiches 

one sandwich 

three sandwichs 

three sandwiches 

a e-mail 

six orangees 

two e-mails 

a orangees 

an e-mail 

an orange 

eight e-mailes 

five oranges 

 

Exercise 9 – suggested answers 

b) an orange / a red orange / a big orange / a tasty orange / a juicy orange 

c) a key / a golden key / a small key / a rusty key 

d) pencils / colouring pencils / strange pencils / six pencils / six cheap pencils 

e) keys / five keys / five important keys / new keys / old keys 

f) a woman / a happy woman / a young woman / a blond woman 

g) women / dark-haired women / eighteen women 

h) men / eleven men / people / eleven strange people 

 

48 

 

Unit 3 – forms of to be (am/is/are) 

 

Exercise 1 

I 

He 
She 
It 

You 
We 
They 

am 

is 

are 

a woman. 

a man. 

a student. 

happy. 

here now. 

old. 

 

Exercise 3 

a) am   b) are  c) are  d) are 

 

Exercise 5 

a) Mary __is___ happy. 

e) Mary and Sue __are___ American. 

b) She __is___ from the USA. 

f) They __are__ doctors. 

c) John __is___ in Paris. 

d) I __am___ a waiter. 

 

Exercise 6 

a) She is an actor. 

b) They are from London. 

g) You __are____ an architect. 

h) Rachel __is___ a teacher. 

e) Katrin is a student. 

f) We are friends. 

c) I am from the Czech Republic. 

g) My teacher is from London. 

d) Mary and Peter are in Paris. 

h) John is a taxi driver. 

 

Exercise 9 – suggested answers 

a) It’s a photograph. / This is a photograph. / There is a photograph in the picture. / 

There is a family in the photograph. / It’s a photograph of a family. / The photograph is nice. 

b) It’s a car. / It’s an old car./ This is a car. / There is a car in the picture. / There is 

a good gar in the picture. / The car is big 

c)  It’s an  ice-cream.  /  It’s  a  vanilla ice-cream.  /  This  is  a tasty  ice-cream.  /  There is 

an ice-cream in picture C. / In picture C there is an ice-cream. / The ice-cream is cold. 

49 

 

d) It’s a boy. / It’s a young man. / This is a head. / There is a boy in the picture. / In 

picture D there is a young man. / The man is young. 

 

Exercise 11 

 

This is 

 

She is 

 

He is  

 

Tom and Gwyneth are  

 

These are 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

good books. 

 

a famous actor. 

 

an exercise. 

 

famous actors. 

 

an elegant woman. 

50 

 

 Unit 4 – possessive adjectives 

 

Exercise 1 

I – my 

you – your 

we – our 

they – their 

he – his 

she – her 

it – its 

 

Exercise 2 

Mandy is an architect. She’s 26 and she’s married. Her husband is thirty-two and her 

son is one. Mandy likes flowers. Her favourite flowers are roses. 

 

Exercise 3  

Paul is an actor. He likes his job. His wife, María, is a shop assistant. She also likes 

her job. They are both 40. They are from Brazil. Their daughter is in the USA now. 

 

Exercise 5 

a) Their/They are from Italy. 

e) Where are you/your from? 

b) Her/She’s name’s Sally. 

c) His/He’s from the USA. 

f) What’s she/her name? 

g) Is you/your teacher good? 

d) His/He’s teacher is in Russia. 

h) Rachel is I/my teacher. 

 

51 

 

 

Exercise 6 

1  Andy 

Hello. My name’s Andy. 

 2  Tom 

Hello, Andy! How are you? 

 

What’s your name? 

Andy 

Very well, thanks. And you? 

Suzi 

My name’s Suzi. 

Tom 

I’m fine, thanks. Who’s that 

Andy 

Where are you from, Suzi? 

 

girl over there? 

Suzi 

I’m from Hamburg, in 

Andy 

She/That’s my new friend. 

 

 

Germany. And you? Where 

 

Her name’s Suzi. 

are you from? 

Tom 

Where’s she from? 

Andy 

I’m from Boston. 

Andy 

She’s from Germany. 

Exercise 7 

(cid:1) we and our three children 

(cid:1) we and our neighbours 

(cid:1) Miss Brown and her brother 

(cid:1) Paul and his wife 

(cid:1) Jane and her friend Sarah 

(cid:1) four students and their teacher 

(cid:1) Mr and Mrs Hill and their daughter 

(cid:1) a French woman with her husband 

(cid:1) Peter and his friend Andy 

(cid:1) you and your sister Kate  

 

Exercise 8 

Her name is Sarah Green. She is from the USA. She is 29. She is a nurse.  

Her father is 61. He’s an architect. Her mother is 54. She’s a teacher.  

Her brother is 27. He’s an actor. 

 

Exercise  12 – suggested answers 

The girl in picture A is blonde, but the boy in picture B is dark-haired. 

The girl in picture A is with her mother and her toy.  

The boy in picture B is with his father and his book. 

In picture A there is a mother with her daughter.  

In picture B there is a father with his son. 

The mother is dark-haired. The father is dark-haired, too. 

The child in picture B is nice, and the child in picture A is pretty. 

The child in picture A is cute, and the child in picture B is clever. 

52 

 

 

Conclusion 

The aim of the present thesis is to learn how to create grammar practice materials for 

beginner  and  elementary  learners  who  find  English  difficult  and  are  willing  to  spend  some 

time practising it even out of their English classes. 

The theoretical part of the thesis investigates the ways to teach grammar and the needs 

of adults. First of all, I have searched for and presented a definition of grammar. Then I have 

described  changes  in  the  popularity  of  grammar  teaching,  and  collected  interesting 

and important  ideas  from  various  methods  and  approaches.  Only  ideas  that  were  somehow 

connected  with  grammar  teaching  were  chosen.  Next  I  have  summarized  ways  to  present 

and practise grammar in a self-study material. The last chapter of the theory deals with adults 

and  their  characteristics  as  learners.  A  subchapter  on  learners  with  specific  learning 

difficulties  has  been  included  as  the  aim  of  the  thesis  is  to  help  adults  who  find  English 

difficult. 

The practical part of the thesis represents a sample material of a self-study grammar 

book that could be created one day. It tries to use the knowledge gained in the theoretical part. 

It  consists  of  four  example  units  with  a  key  to  most  of  the  exercises,  and  a  portfolio  to 

the presented grammar units. 

All the collected data and practical examples are just a beginning. A first step made 

on a 

long 

journey 

leading 

to  a  full-length  grammar  book,  preferably  colourful, 

and accompanied with a CD. A grammar-book that would help the lost learners find their way 

through  the  many  traps  of  English  grammar,  give  them  opportunities  to  speak  and  read 

in English, and allow them to experience success. I hope that the first step I have made helps 

some author or authors one day, and that the grammar book I envision will emerge. 

 

53 

 

Resumé 

Tato práce se zaměřuje na výuku gramatiky prostřednictvím domácí cvičebnice. Cílem 

práce je nabídnout dospělým lidem, kteří jsou v angličtině úplnými či falešnými začátečníky, 

dobře  uspořádané  materiály,  které  by  –  kromě  tradičních  cvičení  –  obsahovaly  také 

zajímavější a komunikativnější cvičení.  

Teoretická  část  zkoumá  různá  fakta  a  názory  spojené  s výukou  gramatiky  a  výukou 

dospělých.  Zahrnuta  je  i  podkapitola  nabízející  krátký  pohled  do  oblasti  výuky  studentů 

se specifickými poruchami učení. Praktická část obsahuje seznam gramatických jevů, které se 

začátečníci  obvykle  učí,  a  dále  nabízí  několik  gramatických  lekcí  vytvořených  tak,  aby 

vyhovovaly  potřebám  těchto  začátečníků.  Každá  lekce  je  doplněna  komentářem  a  klíčem. 

Práce navíc obsahuje portfolio shrnující látku těchto lekcí. 

 

Summary 

The present thesis focuses on teaching grammar through self-study materials. The aim 

of  the  thesis  is  to  provide  beginner  and  elementary  adult  learners  of  English  with  well-

structured materials that would – besides traditional exercises – also contain more interesting, 

and more communicative exercises.   

The theoretical part explores various facts and ideas connected with grammar teaching 

and teaching adults; a subchapter offering a brief insight into teaching students with specific 

learning  difficulties  is  included.  The  practical  part  lists  grammar  points  usually  taught  to 

the target  group  and  offers  a  few  grammar  units  created  to  meet  their  needs.  Each  unit  is 

accompanied  with  a  commentary  and  a  key.  A  portfolio  to  the  present  units  is  included.

54 

 

References 

Celce-Murcia, Marianne. 1988. Techniques and Resources in Teaching Grammar. New York 

and Oxford: OUP. 

Degnan-Veness, Coleen. 2001. Timesaver grammar Activities: Elementary. Salisbury: Mary 

Glasgow Magazines, an imprint of Scholastic Inc. 

Evans, Virginia and Jenny Dooley. 2005. Upstream Elementary: Teacher’s Book. Newbury: 

Express Publishing.  

Falla, Tim, and Liz and John Soars. 2002. New Headway Beginner: Workbook with key. 

Oxford: OUP.  

Greenall, Simon. 1997. Reward Elementary: Student’s Book. Oxford: Macmillan. 

Harmer, Jeremy. 1987. Teaching and Learning Grammar. Harlow: Longman. 

Harmer, Jeremy. 1991. The practice of English language teaching. Harlow: Longman. 

Hartingerová, Zdena, Dana Hurtová, Joan Hood, and Lenka Lánská. 2005. Deníček: Soubor 

podpůrných materiálů k učebnici Chit Chat 1 (Little Journal: A Collection of Support 

Materials to Chit Chat 1). Prague: OUP. www.oup.com/elt (accessed March 26, 2008). 

Hornby, Albert Sidney. 2000. Morphology. In Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary. 6th ed. 

Edited by Sally Wehmeier. Oxford: OUP. 

Hornby, Albert Sidney. 2000. Syntax. In Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary. 6th ed. 

Edited by Sally Wehmeier. Oxford: OUP. 

Hurtová, Dana, Iva Strnadová and Marta Šigutová. 2006. Anglický nápadníček (Ideas for 

English). Oxford: OUP. 

Hutchinson, Tom. 1998. New Hotline Starter: Student’s Book. Oxford: OUP. 

Hutchinson, Tom. 1999. Lifelines Elementary: Workbook. Oxford: OUP. 

Kerka, Sandra. 1998. “Adults with Learning Disabilities.” ERIC Digest. 

www.ericdigest.org/1998-2/adults.htm (accessed March 24, 2008). 

Kollmannová, Ludmila. 1997. Angličtina pro samouky (Self-study Book of English). Prague: 

Leda. 

Lieb, Stephen. Fall 1991. “Principles of Adult Learning.” Online article from VISION. 

Honolulu Community College. 

http://honolulu.hawaii.edu/intranet/Committees/FacDevCom/guidebk/techtip/adults-

2.htm (accessed February 15, 2008). 

Lowry, Cheryl Meredith. 1990. “Teaching Adults with Learning Disabilities.” ERIC Digest. 

www.ericdigest.org/pre-9215/adults.htm (accessed March 27, 2008). 

55 

 

Moor, Peter and Sarah Cunningham. 2001. Cutting Edge Elementary: Workbook. Harlow: 

Longman. 

n.a. 2005. “Back Pain.” BBC News. 

http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/medical_notes/4722017.stm (accessed November 28, 

2008). 

Pye, Diana and Simon Greenall. 1997. Reward Starter: Practice Book. Oxford: Macmillan. 

Quirk, Randolph and Sidney Greenbaum. 1990. A Student’s Grammar of the English 

Language. Harlow: Longman. 

Richards, Jack C. and Theodore S. Rodgers. 2001. Approaches and methods in language 

teaching. 2nd ed. Cambridge: CUP. 

Schwarz, Robin L. 1997. “Learning Disabilities and Foreign Language Learning.” LD Online. 

www.ldonline.org/article/6065 (accessed March 10, 2008). 

Scrivener, Jim. 2005. Learning Teaching: A guidebook for English language teachers. 2nd 

ed. Oxford: Macmillan. 

Soars, Liz and John. 2006. New Headway Elementary: Student’s Book. 3rd ed. Oxford: OUP. 

Soars, Liz and John and Sylvia Wheeldon. 2006. New Headway Elementary: Workbook with 

key. 3rd ed. Oxford: OUP. 

Skalová, Helena. 2007. Teaching English One-to-One. Unpublished BA thesis, Masaryk 

University. 

Swan, Michael and Scott Thornbury. 2006. “Sorry, but you’ve got to have a grammar 

syllabus”. The ELT Journal / IATEFL debate 2006. Oxford Teachers’ Club. 

www.oup.com/elt (accessed October 18, 2007). 

Thanasoulas, Dimitrios. 2002. “The Changing Winds and Shifting Sands of the History of 

English Language Teaching.” EnglishClub.com. www.englishclub.com/tefl-

articles/history-english-language-teaching.htm (accessed November 22, 2007). 

Thornbury, Scott. 1999. How to Teach Grammar. Harlow: Longman. 

Ur, Penny. 1988. Grammar Practice Activities: A practical guide for teachers. Cambridge: 

CUP. 

Ur, Penny. 1996. A Course in Language Teaching. Cambridge: CUP. 

 

  

56 

 

Appendices 
 

Appendix 1 – Dominoes with plurals 

Adapted from Ur (1988, 87) 

 

57 

 

Appendix 2 – Practice cards 

1 

3 

5 

7 

2 

4 

6 

8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

58 

